---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/01-sources/01-02-articles/benjamin-late-quaternarysealevel2017/"}
---


title: Late Quaternary sea-level changes and early human societies in the central and eastern Mediterranean Basin: An interdisciplinary review
author: Benjamin, J.
year: 2017
DOI: 
Citekey: BenjaminLateQuaternarysealevel2017
page range: 1–29
type: #journalarticle
process status: #linked  

_ _ _ _
# Notes

- [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/global mean sea level change plotted over time\|global mean sea level change plotted over time]]

“The transition from the LGM to early Holocene saw major changes to both coastal landscape evolution and human populations. The Neolithic transition, or ‘Neolithisation’ process, can be described as a cultural shift beginning with the emergence of agriculture and animal husbandry; it is one of the pivotal developments in human evolution, comparable in scale with language, tool use and bipedalism (Zeder, 2006). This is particularly relevant to the Mediterranean Basin, which is thought to have played a significant role in these cultural and technological changes which also coincided with a period of rapid sea-level change.” ([Benjamin et al., 2017, p. 15](zotero://select/library/items/I3N2SXXH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/PTNVIPHE?page=15&annotation=JCKK2CL7))

“Sea-level rise changed the physical landscape, inundated coastal sites, displaced fishing and shellfishing grounds and created isolated environments in the form of new islands, bays and straits, which would have been culturally occupied throughout these processes of evolution and occasionally punctuated events of both eustatic and tectonic origin.” ([Benjamin et al., 2017, p. 15](zotero://select/library/items/I3N2SXXH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/PTNVIPHE?page=15&annotation=ERLAJILK))

“It is now generally accepted that the extended process, which saw the human inhabitants of the Mediterranean Basin during the early Holocene shift from a subsistence model of hunter-gatherer to herder-farmer, can be considered a complex and dynamic process which took some three millennia to complete its course along Mediterranean coasts (Zeder, 2008, Fig. 2) and which has even been characterised as a ‘mixed migrationist/diffusionists model’ (Richards, 2003). Recent focus has shifted away from early models of a steady ‘wave of advance’ popularised by Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza (1971), which predicted an annual rate of the westward spread of the Neolithic package, mainly domesticated plants and animals. Studies of demography (e.g. Bocquet-Appel, 2011), burial practices (e.g. Hershkovitz and Galili, 1990) as well as those focused on early herding (e.g. Mlekuz, 2003), have continued to make a significant contribution to the key debates. Such discussions also have been impacted by recent studies in ancient DNA (e.g. Richards, 2003; Haak et al., 2010; Skoglund et al., 2012).” ([Benjamin et al., 2017, p. 16](zotero://select/library/items/I3N2SXXH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/PTNVIPHE?page=16&annotation=PXXUUVLY))

“Early maritime voyages have also been suggested to have played a key role in pre-Neolithic life in the eastern Mediterranean (Simmons, 2007). Other island colonisation debates remain unresolved. Antonioli et al. (2014) suggested that the earliest presence of H. sapiens on Sicily coincided with the land-bridge connection during the LGM. Palombo et al. (2017), on the other hand, found that the oldest H. Sapiens from Sardinia is dated to 8500 BP. Colonisation of uninhabited islands aside, it can be difficult to establish the extent of impact the rising sea levels had on past societies when much of the archaeological record has been lost, or remains under water, undiscovered.” ([Benjamin et al., 2017, p. 16](zotero://select/library/items/I3N2SXXH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/PTNVIPHE?page=16&annotation=CWWVAPFN))

“Although the Mediterranean basin lies beyond the direct influence of ice sheets, ice-sheet loading had a pronounced effect on the shape of Mediterranean sea-level curves. This is seen in the output of GIA models, which produce lower sea levels when ice loading is increased (e.g. Lambeck and Purcell, 2005; Stocchi and Spada, 2009). In the eastern and southern regions of the Mediterranean, the ice-loading effect is least significant and along coasts where tectonics can be discarded (e.g. Lybia) the regional sea level approximates the global eustatic value (Milne and Mitrovica, 2008).” ([Benjamin et al., 2017, p. 18](zotero://select/library/items/I3N2SXXH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/PTNVIPHE?page=18&annotation=ANNLWLR9))

“The Protohistoric coastal structures of the Mediterranean Basin and their archaeological signatures, have suffered from the development of later societies: many sites were destroyed, incorporated or generally transformed the pre-existing archaeological evidence. In particular, widespread diffusion and large stone construction (especially during the Classical periods) have resulted in the loss of the protohistoric features, through human reuse and recycling of materials. Thus, information on sea levels in the Bronze and Iron Age based on coastal settlements' remains is not as well documented as in later periods and is often related to a few selected sites, as in the case of the harbour of Marseille.” ([Benjamin et al., 2017, p. 18](zotero://select/library/items/I3N2SXXH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/PTNVIPHE?page=18&annotation=3VT6PSYR))

“While submergence occurred in some parts of the world due to tectonics or loading of the underlying deltaic sediments, other coastal cities from the same periods are now positioned several kilometres inland as a result of river sedimentation. Sites such as Troy (Kraft et al., 2003), Miletus (Brückner et al., 2006), Liman tepe (Goodman-Tchernov et al., 2009b), and Acco (Morhange et al., 2016) provide such examples.” ([Benjamin et al., 2017, p. 18](zotero://select/library/items/I3N2SXXH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/PTNVIPHE?page=18&annotation=2G23IM4N))

“Sites lost to the sea due to subsidence and tectonic activity are not unique to prehistory and as noted by Broodbank (2013) ‘the end of the beginning’ or the emergence of classical periods, saw entire cities submerged. The now well known ‘sunken cities’ of Egypt (Robinson and Goddio, 2015; see also Stanley and Bernasconi, 2012) are also in contrast to the earlier site at Pavlopetri (Late Bronze Age), because they appear to have been submerged during a period of their flourishment, and not after their abandonment. The cognitive impacts on lost habitat would have differed from that of earlier periods, particularly pre-Neolithic settled societies; the scale of these proto-urban and fully urban submerged sites would have resulted in a much greater cumulative impact than during the Neolithic or earlier periods, due to population size and overall settlement scale. Imprints on the collective histories, both oral and written, relating to sea levels, land loss, and their practical and spiritual impacts require increased consideration by the archaeological community for both fully sedentary and mobile societies.” ([Benjamin et al., 2017, p. 19](zotero://select/library/items/I3N2SXXH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/PTNVIPHE?page=19&annotation=B5FVPT5M))