---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/maritime-history-podcast/02-episodes/series-1-the-bronze-age/001-a-maritime-prehistory-of-the-mediterranean/","contentClasses":"fnote"}
---

tags: #podcastepisode

# Introduction

The Ancient Greek philosopher Plato famously compared the ancient Mediterranean people to [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/Plato’s metaphor of “frogs round a pond”\|“ants or frogs around a pond.”]][^1]

Although he was writing about the world of 2,500 years ago, Plato recognized the almost instinctive human attraction toward the sea. Plato of course qualifies as “ancient” when we look back on history from our perspective today, but Plato himself looked back on the ancients of his day, too. It’s a little hard to fathom the scales of time, but many early empires and civilizations were about the same amount of time removed from Plato’s life as he is from ours today.

Plato also wrote about a place called Atlantis, a place you might have heard of before. While that was no doubt an allegory, and while Atlantis supposedly sank into the sea, it still prompts me to think about the numerous sites from our ancient past that are now submerged by the seas and oceans of the world. Climate change and sea-level rise have been a constant factor in our globe’s history, so to that end, today I want to consider the Mediterranean Sea and how a whole new understanding of ancient humans and their relationship with the sea is being revealed by modern nautical archaeology. 

If Plato’s early humans were the “frogs around a pond,” and that pond was the Mediterranean, then nautical archaeology can tell us a lot about what was lost when the pond got bigger, and what it might indicate.

---
# A Brief Hello

Welcome to the Maritime History Podcast. I’m Brandon Huebner, and today we begin with Episode 001: A Maritime Prehistory of the Mediterranean. 

This podcast is an episodic look at maritime history as a whole. Such a project obviously gives us many miles to cover and many ports to visit. The most logical place to begin, though, is the Mediterranean Sea. It’s drawn scholarly focus for millennia, and because of the climates, ecologies, and geography in that region, the Mediterranean presents an almost laboratory setting that helps us consider fundamental questions and ideas that we will see in many future discussions about maritime history.

As you’ve likely already gathered, we aren’t going to begin with talk of the Age of Sail or buccaneers or naval battles. Not yet. We will certainly get to those, but we need to lay some groundwork first. I think that maritime prehistory and ancient mariners will prove more interesting than you might imagine, so let’s dive in.

---
# Sea-level Rise and Coastal Sites

We begin all the way back during the Last Glacial Maximum. This period occurred from roughly 30,000 to 16,000 BCE, and [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/global mean sea level change plotted over time\|at that time the global sea levels were 120-130 meters lower than they are today. ]]This is around 400 feet lower, so a rather shocking difference.[^2] Obviously, when we narrow the scope to just the Mediterranean, the difference was not at that extreme, but the overall point is the same. To put a number on it, archaeologist [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/The gentle slope of some sea coast areas has resulted in a drastic difference in what has been subsumed in ensuing millennia and what has not\|Cyprian Broodbank estimates that three to 400,000 square kilometers that would have been occupied 30,000 years ago are now submerged by the Mediterranean, leaving up to 150,000 square miles of potential lost archaeological sites.]][^3]

This is precisely where nautical archaeology comes into focus for us. Innovations in modern technology have helped this relatively recent discipline study sites that have otherwise been inaccessible for tens of thousands of years, and the information scholars are finding is giving us a much clearer image about how maritime connections formed and influenced human societal development.

Consider this example on the Mediterranean coast of southern France. The Cosquer Cave near Marseille houses ancient cave art from at least 27,000 years ago. The cave was submerged by rising sea levels during the early Holocene period, but the art inside was preserved, essentially creating a time capsule. Not until 1985 did a diver named Cosquer discover the cave entrance submerged 37 meters (121 feet) below sea level. To put the sea-level changes into perspective, 20,000 years ago when ancient humans were actively using the cave, [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/during the Last Glacial Maximum, most hunter-gatherers lived in landscapes that are now beneath the sea\|it was located several miles away from the Mediterranean shore and the entrance was positioned about 100 meters (330 feet) above sea level.]][^4] Thus, in this location the sea-level has risen roughly 450 feet.

Anyways, inside the sealed cave, divers gradually discovered a multitude of artistic works on the walls, created by prehistoric artists using various pigments and charcoal. Among the findings at Cosquer were several dozen hand-stencils and captivating depictions of animals such as horses, deer, bison, and the now-extinct auroch.

The Cosquer Cave art tends to steal the headlines because of the imagery, but nautical archaeology also is crucial at sites like La Draga, a Neolithic village on the eastern shore of Catalonia’s Lake Banyoles. There archaeologists are studying a village dating to the end of the 6th millennium BCE. Part of the site was still above water, but a substantial portion was below the water-level of the lake. Silt and mud below the water level preserved many things that would have long since degraded in a site still above water. [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/submerged ancient sites counterintuitively preserve more elements that above-ground buried sites see degrade over the normal course of history\|At La Draga, nautical archaeologists have found things as diverse as wheat, peas, fruit, and nuts, and then daily use items like baskets, wooden bowls, spoons, and ladles, along with weapons like yew bows, dogwood arrows, and javelins.]][^5]

These two examples are, I think, very useful and instructive, even if big shipwreck discoveries are the only ones that tend to make the nightly news. Across the spectrum of popularity, nautical archaeology is the main reason why such discoveries are possible.

That said, there are some regions where even nautical archaeology can’t be of much use, and we’ll come to visit those regions in due time. One example that comes to mind is the Nile Delta region, a rather important region in the history of Egypt and its relationship with the Mediterranean. [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/sediment buildup in the Nile Delta makes archaeological work particularly difficult\|The issue in the Nile Delta is that continual silt buildup over millennia has buried the oldest sites, putting many of them under sediment and under the water table.]][^6] Archaeology has had a much harder time accessing sites in that region, sadly.

---
# A Mediterranean Maritime Prehistory

All right, we are moving ahead. Now that we’ve briefly touched the importance of nautical archaeology to our current understanding of history and especially prehistory, let’s begin to outline what the current understanding of prehistory actually is. Written records aren’t really a thing until you get close to the 4th millennium BCE, and the term “prehistory” carries the idea that everything that happened before the roughly 3500 BCE marker happened before recorded history. This doesn’t mean that anything before then is inaccessible to us, merely that we have to work a little harder to access it.

That is where archaeology and other related disciplines come in. To make sense of what they tell us, a lot of synthesis is required. One key book that I will mention a lot today is _The Making of the Middle Sea_ by Cyprian Broodbank. In this history of the Mediterranean, Broodbank gives us his pithy observation that for a very long time, ancient hominins in the Mediterranean region were not big fans of the water. He says it was [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/the Mediterranean hominins were slow to adapt to use of the sea\|“far from a case of love at first sight.”]][^7] Obviously large bodies of water can be terrifyingly unpredictable and dangerous, so I don’t necessarily blame our ancestors for their disposition.

We know, of course, that humans overcame those tendencies and began to venture onto the water. Precise timing varies around the world, and as we said earlier, submerged prehistoric sites mean that we have an incomplete record of the past that is changing all the time as we make discoveries. Currently, we know that [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/stone tools discovered on the Indonesian island of Flores show that hominins crossed 12-20 miles of sea 800,000 years ago\|in Southeast Asia there is evidence that hominins could cross 12 to 15 miles of sea as far as 800,000 years ago.]][^8] There, stone tools have been found on islands that were inaccessible at that time unless someone made some type of sea crossing. Other discoveries in northern Australia have recently confirmed that homo sapiens colonized the land known as Sahul around 65,000 years ago. The crossing to Sahul would have required a chain of open-water sailing stints that, in at least one place, required traveling out of sight of land and navigating over 40 miles of water.[^9]

These examples are from timeframes far earlier than we see in Mediterranean. There, it seems that early man took longer to give maritime travel a shot. Neanderthals did inhabit the shores of the sea, but evidence that they traveled by the sea is less direct than we might hope. Sea-level change makes it difficult to parse out which of the numerous Mediterranean islands were actually islands 100,000 years ago versus which ones didn’t qualify because they were connected to a mainland. In some cases, discoveries like ancient elephant fossils on the Aegean island of Delos can serve as proof positive that the island was at one time attached to the mainland. [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/elephant remains on Mediterranean islands show the geographical evolution alongside the biological\|“In Sicily, Sardinia, Crete, Cyprus and Malta, the bones of dwarf elephants point to the degeneration of an ancient species, literally trapped when the islands broke away.”]][^10]

When it comes to ancient humans on the water, scholars think that at least a few of the larger islands in the Aegean, islands like Kefalonia and Melos, seem to bear evidence of Neanderthal tools. [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/neanderthals were among the first we can prove who inhabited the shores of Mediterranean and probably used crude tree boats to access nearby islands\|Since these islands were likely never connected to the mainland, the tool-makers must have gotten there somehow.]][^11]

Recently there was also some rather headline-stealing news that several quartz hand-axes discovered on Crete could be confirmation that hominins made their way to that island sometime even before 130,000 BCE. In full confession, I am less familiar with that work and what it might signify. The bottom line of the discovery means [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/quartz hand-axes dated before 130,000 BCE have been found on Crete\|it’s entirely possible that Paleolithic man did find his way to Crete, and since Crete has no doubt been an island for far longer than some of the other sites we’ll discuss, dated evidence from Crete will be important for future research focused on the region’s prehistory.]][^12]

Ultimately, we can tell that both Neanderthals and homo sapiens did take to the water in various places and cross moderate distances on rudimentary vessels. These vessels likely spanned a range from mere floating platforms, to dugout canoes, to reed rafts and boats in some regions. Most prehistoric maritime travel was done by coastal hunter-gatherers who may have been compelled to forage for various things on the islands that they could access by short sea-crossings; that’s what the evidence so far discovered seems to hint at, anyway. None of their sea travel was systematic or tending toward routine maritime commerce, so our next question then becomes, when does routine maritime commerce emerge, and how can we tell?

---
# Obsidian as a measure of activity (and maybe trade)

The short answer is that “seafaring” in a more regular sense begins to emerge in the Mesolithic. Somewhere around 12,000 BCE in the Mediterranean. Broodbank uses the label “seafaring” because navigation that took several days (or even weeks) where mariners had to go outside the sight of land becomes more frequent in the Mesolithic. We know this because of places like the island of Cyprus.

By 11,000 BCE, Cyprus was separated from Anatolia by at least 65 kilometers, or 40 miles, and from the northern Levant by 100 kilometers, or 60 miles. There are several sites on the island from dates this early, and [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/human presence on Cyprus by 11,000 BCE indicates more regular and longer-distance maritime movement\|anyone who crossed to the Cyprus during the Younger Dryas would not have had any smaller islands in between to make the journey more of a hop-skip type of affair; they would have had to paddle, float, or sail the entire way.]][^13]

By the Mesolithic in the Mediterranean, Neanderthals pretty much fall off the scene and we do start to see more frequent signs of increased maritime activity. There are very few remains of boats or even depictions of boats from this far back in history (though we will talk about a few later today), so the best way to decipher the big picture of how ancient man moved around is to trace back those items that humans brought along with them to see if we can pinpoint where they originated.

Metals are not really part of the archaeological record yet, but with the later Bronze and Iron Ages we’ll start to see how metals are in many ways the blood pumping through the veins of a growing commercial network. This idea that maritime movement can be viewed as a network built upon trade, this idea will be a recurring theme for us. But, before metals can show up as good evidence for such networks and trade, we have other materials of a considerably more fragile nature.

The recognizable black volcanic glass called obsidian is the main one we’ll focus on today. The Roman author/philosopher Pliny the Elder mentions obsidian in his ‘Natural History’, where he describes it as a dark glass, sometimes transparent. He says that the Romans used it as a mirror, they often used it in jewelry, and Pliny even saw a solid-obsidian statue of the emperor Augustus.[^14] It’s a side-note, but I find some slight irony here to look at Pliny’s writing on obsidian if we also recall that he perished in the 79 CE eruption of Mount Vesuvius on the day that it buried Pompeii and Herculaneum.

A second side-note concerns one victim of the Vesuvius eruption who apparently had their brain partly turned into obsidian. Scholars in Naples have written about a body discovered at Herculaneum where a thin layer of obsidian was present in the victim's skull. Their theory is that it got there through a process known as vitrification, where in this case, a brain was liquified due to extreme heat, but then rapidly cooled as ash deposits buried the eruption site.[^15] So, apparently, obsidian can also be volcanic brain glass. Who knew.

In most cases obsidian is simply made by the rapid cooling of lava ejected from a volcano. Because each volcano and the minerals and materials that make it up are more-or-less unique, archaeologists can trace obsidian found at any given archaeological site back to the volcano from whence it came.[^16]

Obsidian was attractive to Mesolithic humans because they could easily give it a sharp edge that held its shape pretty well. They had no metal tools, so this was quite useful; useful enough that they went out of their way to obtain it from far distant places. Since modern technology allows us to trace obsidian back to its birthplace (I guess the volcano is birthing it in a way, right?), we can paint a rather intriguing network-like picture of how obsidian moved in the ancient world. The picture gives us a lot of insight into how humans must also have moved too. Such a study becomes very insightful in and around the islands of the Mediterranean, where the only way obsidian could have gotten there was via water-based navigation.

Human movement and trade is obviously a constant process, and so is climate change. [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/tracing obsidian trade patterns in the western Cyclades shows that seafaring began in the Younger Dryas\|As the Mesolithic gave way to the Neolithic, the globe gradually warmed  and the sea gradually rose, so islands continued to evolve in the Mediterranean.]][^17] That evolution can again make it slightly difficult to study maritime trade, just because we have to try and determine what was an island at which point in time, and if that ever changed.

That said, most obsidian found in and around the modern-day regions of Italy and Greece can be traced back to some source on an island in the Mediterranean, at least when we are talking Neolithic-era obsidian. The primary sources of obsidian lie in three main areas and groups of islands. One is found in the Aegean Sea and another in the Tyrrhenian Sea. The last is the area around the eastern Mediterranean island of Cyprus, and it is there that we’ll stop first as we work our way east to west.

We said earlier that human presence on Cyprus around 11,000 BCE was significant. The island is again significant because obsidian is found there but it could not possibly have originated there, since Cyprus has no natural sources of obsidian. The obsidian found on Cyprus can be traced back to Anatolia, so we can be certain that Neolithic man ventured onto the water to bring his precious resource over to Cyprus.[^18] There is enough obsidian on the island that it must have been brought consistently over time, though we cannot tell very clearly how regular the sea travel would have been.

The oldest obsidian found on Cyprus is currently oldest of any such artifacts found around the Mediterranean, but some of the obsidian found on other islands can better help illuminate the types of networks, if any, that may have been in place in Neolithic times.

In the Aegean, the major source of obsidian was an island called Melos. This island lies due north of Crete, but within the Cyclades, so it lies in the southwest as far as the entire Aegean Sea is concerned. Current evidence indicates that early humans accessed obsidian on Melos as far back as 13,000 BCE, making it the oldest direct evidence of seafaring by anatomically modern humans, although we must remember the other evidence tied to Crete that goes back much further. Broodbank emphasizes that this evidence from [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/tracing obsidian trade patterns in the western Cyclades shows that seafaring began in the Younger Dryas\|Melos is surely just the tip of the iceberg, so in all likelihood, much more sea activity was occurring in the Cyclades and the Greek islands even before 13,000 BCE.]][^19]

One of the most intriguing sites where obsidian from Melos has been found is the Franchthi Cave, located on the Greek mainland, specifically in Argolis on the Peloponnese. The cave is about 120 km, or 75 miles, from Melos as the crow flies, and almost all of this is separated by water. That doesn’t mean that Mesolithic man made a 75-mile sea-crossing, though. It’s more likely that ancient man island hopped from somewhere closer on the mainland, then across the series of small islands leading to Melos. 

This possibility has been demonstrated through experimental archaeology, where scholars try to recreate the conditions and build boats and ships that hew as closely to those that would have been used in the past. The idea is to re-create everything as closely as possible to get the best idea we can about what would have been feasible for ancient humans: what kind of boats could have been made with the tools they had access to? How would those boats have performed? Things like that. Most experimental archaeology projects have recreated ships or boats based on the best direct evidence that we have for how they would have been built.

When it comes to Melos, experimental archaeology has had to make a few more assumptions, since we have no direct evidence of boats that were used in pre-history. Sadly, the materials used to make them have long since withered away. We’ll close today’s talk by looking at some of the oldest boats that have been found, but when we talk about Melos and the Aegean circa 13,000 BCE, we just have no remains of seagoing craft at all, unfortunately.

In the 1980s, archaeologists used ancient records and assumptions based on tool and resource availability to recreate a traditional _papyrella_ reed-boat from Corfu, which was built to a length of 6 meters using reed bundles and natural rope.[^20] Similar implementations of this type of boat are also found in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and are even used in various cultures around the world still today. There are varying degrees of complexity that can be applied, but in the most rudimentary form, this type of boat can be built using only stone blades to cut the papyrus reeds and then ropes of some sort to lash them together. Cyprus wood is often added to modern versions to increase stability and durability. Of course, it’s not outside the realm of reason that even Paleolithic man could have taken similar steps to make more durable boats, though, again, we have no evidence to confirm this.[^21]

The _papyrella_ experiment ultimately proved that ancient man could have made the journey from mainland Greece to Melos and back again, with a moderate haul of obsidian aboard on the return journey.[^22] This particular experimental journey was powered by 6 rowers and made over 5 sea-crossings of 15-20 kilometers each. [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/a local reed boat called a ‘papyrela’ in Corfu is a modern experiment to show how Mesolithic man may have used small boats in the Cyclades\|Rowers faced challenges with winds and rough sea conditions but managed to complete the journey in 7 days.]][^23] A round trip could have taken up to a month in ancient times. In sum, ancient seafarers were intrepid explorers for their time and means, all for the sake of obtaining obsidian.

Broodbank points out that the earliest traces of Melian obsidian that appear in Franchthi Cave date from 13,000 to 12,000 BCE, which is firmly within the period known as the Younger Dryas. During that period, cold, arid climactic conditions were in effect, so it is rather interesting to see that man was venturing out to an isolated island during times of unfriendly climate change, a time when you might think that more practical concerns were the priority. He says, then, that [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/tracing obsidian trade patterns in the western Cyclades shows that seafaring began in the Younger Dryas\|“Mediterranean seafaring began in hard, not halcyon times, and this, in turn forces a rethink as to why people started to practice it. Humans, as much as hippopotami were under stress, and one likely answer is a search for refuges that would enable members of a recently booming population to survive as prospects deteriorated.”]][^24]

Voyages to obtain obsidian clearly continued after this point, we see obsidian blades and other artifacts continue to pop up in places like Franchthi and elsewhere. This is again why in this general timeframe that we can say that seafaring truly begins in the Mediterranean. Beyond the Aegean and continuing to the west, we also see obsidian transport in the Tyrrhenian Sea, which is on the western coast of Italy, and the islands off her coast there.

The interesting point, though, is that obsidian from sources in the Aegean is not found in Italian contexts, nor vice versa is Tyrrhenian obsidian found in contexts further to the east. At a high level, this tells us that boat voyages to obtain obsidian, along with any ensuing transmission through existing networks of trade, must have remained more-or-less localized.[^25] They were not large-scale or widespread in the sense that we will see in later eras of Mediterranean history. There is also a general trend that indicates that sea-based travel occurred first in the east, in the region around Cyprus and Crete, and then moved to the west gradually thereafter, which is a trend we will recognize with later transmission of maritime technology in the Mediterranean.

Finally here, the general pattern seems to be that most obsidian sources could have been accessed by relatively short-distance sea crossings, 20 kilometers at most in many places, although some may have been greater. Most or all of these would not have taken the ancient seafarers out of sight of land, so although in their own contexts the voyages would have been massive undertakings, in the context of later history they are not necessarily true seafaring in the sense we assume today.         

As we now move squarely into the Neolithic Mediterranean in today’s whirlwind intro to maritime history, we will see true seafaring and, finally, our first actual boat remains and depictions begin to emerge.

---
# from foraging, to farming, to sailing

It may be unfair to say that no true seafaring had occurred before the Neolithic, but [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/The advent of true seafaring in the Mediterranean was a hunter-gatherer invention\|the evidence indicates that hunter-gatherers were the first to make seafaring a part of their identity. With them we see the first signs of routine sea travel for specified and repeated aims.]][^26]

Signs of foraging for obsidian and marine food on various Mediterranean islands give us a portion of the picture. However, these and more patterns begin to reach new levels in the Neolithic, especially as we get near 5,000 BCE on the historical timeline. Perhaps the best example of the Neolithic phase of maritime growth is found on the Aeolian island of Lipari.

Lipari is just north of Sicily in the Tyrrhenian Sea and is one of the volcanic islands in the region, which makes it a source of obsidian, as well. Activity indicators on Lipari begin to accelerate toward 5,000 BCE with evidence that an entire community of at least 100 people was living on the island. They centered on a pseudo-acropolis site overlooking an island harbor. At the time we see the population spike here, there’s related evidence of a spike in obsidian work and distribution over a growing area. Then at this same juncture, on Lipari and around the Mediterranean, pottery begins to appear at archaeological sites with increasing frequency.

On Lipari, there is still more related evidence of ovens, debris from the production of finished blades from the raw obsidian, and also axes, grinding stones, and yet more pottery.[^27] Broodbank evocatively paints this picture for us. He writes: [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/the island of Lipari is the best example of how islands in the Mediterranean rapidly grew and evolved in the Neolithic\|“One attractive interpretation of this strange accumulation is that it reflects the residues of seasonal gatherings of strangers as well as locals, drawn by the magnet of obsidian but also the chance to trade, feast, socialize and swap news in the midst of the sea with people from far away. Such scenarios were unthinkable a millennium earlier, and symbolize the start of the Mediterranean islands’ coming of age.”]][^28]

Why was there this uptick on Lipari, and why are there similar upticks on other Mediterranean islands the further we look into the Neolithic timeline? Simply put, the uptick in maritime activity, island presence, and spread of Neolithic man seems to be tied to the advent and spread of farming. Farming began on the mainland where there was more room, higher populations, and more opportunity for an innovation like organized farming to actually emerge.

But, over time as farming took a stronger hold in mainland population centers around the Mediterranean, we then see it spread onto islands that could support farming. Maybe it goes without saying, but [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/much island life in the Neolithic Mediterranean began as farming made second-best island places more tolerable\|if the development of farming could be taken to an island where food could be grown, well, it would then become possible to live and island where it wouldn’t have been previously.]][^29]

Farming did spread rapidly from east to west over land, but as it did so, there is evidence from especially the larger islands in the various basins of the Mediterranean, think those like Cyprus, Crete, or Sicily, there is evidence that certain farm animals were introduced to these islands before such animals had reached those same longitudes on mainland areas further removed from the sea. Basically, maritime transport facilitated the spread of farming innovations, creating a link between farming spread and the rise of maritime transportation. [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/Maritime mobility was a major medium for the spread of Neolithic farming\|They each contributed advantages that worked together to open up growth opportunities on both fronts.]][^30] I hate the modern buzzword connotation of the word, but the word “synergy” does apply in this context.

---
# Earliest boat remains on record

The final piece we need to introduce to our puzzle today concerns the boats that would have been used. After all, a sturdy boat of some type would be needed to spread livestock or any of the implements or crops necessary to get farming off the ground on a new island. We’ve already seen that reed boats of various types were probably common in the far-distant prehistoric past, and they were no doubt in continual use, despite our lack of direct evidence. These types of boats were not very “seaworthy” in the sense that they could carry large loads far offshore, so then what was used?

Our best guess is based on the appearance of a specific type of boat at various archaeological sites around the world. They go by a few different names, but all of them are pretty literal and give a good sense of what kind of boat we’re talking about. Call them a dugout canoe, a logboat, or, as the ancient Greeks called them, a ‘monoxylon’; these terms all mean the same essential thing. These boats were formed from a single tree or log, and various methods were used to hollow out enough of the interior that it eventually resembled a canoe.

Historians and archaeologists surmise that [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/Neolithic farming evidence on Cyprus indicates that seafaring was central, and the distance would have required use of dugout canoes\|this type of boat must have been used when farming truly began to spread around the Mediterranean simply because it was more sturdy and could handle the weight of more cargo, but also could take the higher forces of journeying further out to sea where wind and waves were greater than along the coastlines.]][^31] One benefit to those of us who study this stuff is that logboats have also survived the passage of time in a way that reed boats just could not. After all, they are a big single-piece log, basically, and a few logboats got buried in the right locations and conditions to have survived remarkably well. Logboats are the oldest boats we’ve found on earth so far, and here are a few examples.

Discoveries on two entirely separate continents actually both date to the same general time around 6,000 BCE. One example was found at a Neolithic site called Kuahuqiao (coo-wa-hoo-chow), found along the Lower Yangtze River in southern China. The entire site is another great example of how sediment and sea-level rise can preserve more material than would otherwise exist after thousands of years. The dugout canoe found at this site was fashioned from a pine log. It’s not preserved in its entirety, but along with the canoe were found three paddles, and also tools that may have been used to shape the logboat, tools like stone adzes, whetstones, and flakes chipped off from the stones as they were either being sharpened or being used. Ultimately, this example of a dugout canoe is somewhat narrow and shallow compared to others. Given the location where it was found,  this one seems to have been used on the relatively calmer waters of a river or lake. Dugouts built for seafaring, such as those you may have seen from Polynesia, were deeper and wider and often used attached outriggers to help provide even more stability, which the Kuahuqiao example lacks.[^32]

A second useful example comes from Nigeria in Africa. Known as the Dufuna canoe, this dugout canoe was discovered in 1987 and it’s been dated to a similar age as the Kuahuqiao canoe. It’s at least 8,000 years old, but it could date even further back, up to 8,500 years old. This dugout is 8 meters long, or 26 feet, so it is not small for a boat of this type. The Dufuna canoe is better preserved than the Chinese dugout, demonstrating the pointed ends that Neolithic craftsmen shaped with their stone tools as they hewed out the inside and shaped the outside of the log. Much of the technique, tool usage, and goal appears to have been the same for both of these Neolithic dugouts, with only the type of native tree used for the log being different. This tells us that this type of boat was universal, and as we’ve seen examples from around the world, let’s now return to Mediterranean Europe to come full circle.

The two examples we’ve already discussed are among the oldest boats found to date, but a dugout found in the Dutch village of Pesse is often labeled as the oldest boat found on earth. I like the ring of the name in Dutch – _de boot van Pesse_. But we can call it the Pesse canoe, and it dates to the Mesolithic, specifically to about 7,700 BCE, almost 10,000 years before the present. This dugout was hewn from a Scots pine log and it is only about 3 meters or 10 feet long, so it is relatively small compared to other dugouts found elsewhere. It was probably hewn out with even more primitive tools than the later examples we’ve seen today, perhaps with flint or antler tools. 

Given the size and where it was discovered, this example was not truly seaworthy. An exact replica of the Pesse canoe was made and successfully paddled on a lake, proving that it would have been useful for Mesolithic man, but the dimensions again are such that it would have struggled on a true sea in those types of conditions. Instead, this canoe would have been useful for the hunter-gatherers who lived in the landscape that Mesolithic riverine Holland presented. Marshes, lakes, and rivers would have made simple movement harder for people groups that lived by hunting, so although making a dugout canoe would have taken them a lot of time and effort, it would have been time well spent. The canoe gave them access to move about the water, to hunt, to fish, and to do so as their food sources required.

There are numerous other dugout canoe examples discovered around Europe, although they tend to be from more recent periods and many of them are associated with river and lake sites, just like the rest we have seen today. So, how does this tie back to our talk about the spread of farming and the rise of maritime movement on the actual Mediterranean Sea? Well, to tie everything together, we return one last time to the Tyrrhenian Sea and to the islands of Lipari, Sicily, and the Neolithic period.

---
# The Monoxylon Expeditions

It was here that another settlement site was discovered in 1989 along the shores of Lake Bracciano, about 20 miles northwest of Rome. The site is called La Marmotta, and here archaeologists have found yet another example of a Neolithic settlement that was over time buried in sediment due to rising water levels. The burial process at the site has again preserved items that would have otherwise broken down long ago; over 100,000 artifacts have been unearthed to date, and among those artifacts from La Marmotta are five dugout canoes, or log boats.

[[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/the dugout canoe from La Marmotta, Italy, (north of Rome) is dated to 5450 BCE and confirms prior assumptions about the navigable distance that Neolithic man could have traveled on rudimentary boats\|These boats vary somewhat in size, but the two largest are nearly 11 meters, or  36 feet, long with a beam, or width, of 1.2 meters or about 4 feet wide. The village site and these boats have been dated to about 5450 BCE, over 7,000 years ago.]][^33] They’re not quite as old as the Pesse canoe, but they are the oldest boats found in Italy so far, and their location and proximity to the Mediterranean is particularly significant to a study of that sea and the progression of seafaring.

As we’ve already outlined, Neolithic man would have used reed boats, and the remains from sites like La Marmotta indicate that they also had logboats at their disposal. The last main question is just how functional were vessels like the dugout canoes we are looking at here? Experimental archaeology to the rescue, once again.

Over a number of years, archaeologists from the Czech Republic have undertaken several of what they call the ‘Monoxylon Expeditions,’ the name, of course, coming from the Greek word for the logboat. Their first expedition, undertaken in 1995, sought to show how a logboat in the Aegean could have fared during a journey, and although we won’t look at that expedition in detail today, I’ll link to their website if you would like to learn more.

The second expedition is the one I’d like to focus on since it had specific ties to Lake Bracciano and the boats found at La Marmotta. This expedition took place in 1998, when they made a replica of one La Marmotta boat that copied the original as closely as possible. The resulting reconstruction was large enough that 11 rowers could power it with 11 paddles, and in so doing, they confirmed some rather remarkable possibilities.

One big caveat that applies to these expeditions also applies to all experimental archaeology that deals with prehistory: namely, that while we can mimic the artifacts that have been found at archaeological sites, we cannot mimic the knowledge pool and even the cognitive processing ability that hominins of 7 to 10 thousand years ago would have possessed, let alone going even further back in time. They may have indeed been quite capable and must have been based on our whole episode so far. But, we are not in a position to know for certain what knowledge and capability they actually had at their disposal, which is merely to say that modern-day experimental archaeology may be inflating such factors in their study of the past. Put another way, we humans today have an ingrained mental model of geography, technology, and all the related knowledge bases that would allow an experimental archaeologist on one of these expeditions to make better judgment calls than a prehistoric human may have been capable of making. Just something to keep in mind, basically.

Nevertheless, the 2nd Monoxylon Expedition, in an exact copy of the La Marmotta boat, was able to average about 20-25 km (12-15 miles) in a craft carrying cargo on the Mediterranean. To quote Broodbank’s conclusion, he writes: [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/the dugout canoe from La Marmotta, Italy, (north of Rome) is dated to 5450 BCE and confirms prior assumptions about the navigable distance that Neolithic man could have traveled on rudimentary boats\|“This kind of performance would bring Lipari in range from Sicily in a single day, and tie many Aegean islands together by one-day crossings, but it implies two or three days and intervening nights to reach a place like Malta.”]][^34]

To tie things off today, it is interesting to note that perhaps the oldest boat depictions from the Central Mediterranean were found in the Tarxien Temples on Malta. This island was inaccessible except by maritime travel, so the Monoxylon Expeditions show that ancient man could have arrived at the island from an origin like Sicily, and ancient boat graffiti on the rock walls of a temple there means that they in fact did venture by sea to leave their mark on the island. [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/the Tarxien temple ship depictions on Malta show a variety of Aegean, Cretan, and Mycenaean ships\|The graffiti may date slightly after 3000 BCE, but various scholars have indicated a range of vessels depicted on Malta, from crude floating rafts all the way to plank-built wooden boats and bundle-boats in between.]][^35]

The reality, then, is that prehistoric man did indeed develop the boats and skills needed to traverse the sea and reach islands otherwise inaccessible. In so doing, innovations around the Neolithic world in farming and other production arenas could be transmitted to areas they’d never yet reached. Maritime movement was intimately connected to innovations in many other spheres, and as things were in the ancient past, so they continued throughout human history.

---
# Conclusion

Today has honestly been just a scratch on the surface, a whirlwind tour of the prehistoric Mediterranean maritime world. If you’d like to learn a bit more, I always include links to source material on the website, which you can find in the episode description. Cyprian Broodbank’s book would be of particular value if you want to learn more, too.

In our next episode we will shift slightly away from the waters of the Mediterranean and begin to look at what you may know as the Cradle of Civilization. The oldest cities on earth are where some histories begin, but as we’ll learn next time, even before cities sprouted up, boats were plying the waters of the Persian Gulf and trade was a consistent focus in Mesopotamia.

The podcast and accompanying videos continue to evolve and I am taking the time to update and reproduce a number of the older, original episodes. Continue to check in for those, and be sure to visit the website for information and links to support my work on Patreon and get access to bonus episodes. Feel free to connect with me on socials where I often post tidbits about historical event anniversaries, too. Thanks for tuning in today crew, and until next time, fair winds and following seas from me here at the Maritime History Podcast.

[^1]: Plato. Phaedo 109b.
[^2]: Benjamin, J. & Rovere, A. & Fontana, et al. "Late Quaternary sea-level changes and early human societies in the central and eastern Mediterranean Basin: An interdisciplinary review." _Quaternary International._ 449. 2017; McGrail, Sean. _Boats of the World: From the Stone Age to Medieval Times_. United Kingdom, Oxford University Press, 2004, p. 88.
[^3]: Broodbank, Cyprian. _The Making of the Middle Sea: A History of the Mediterranean from the Beginning to the Emergence of the Classical World._ United Kingdom: Oxford University Press, 2013, p. 90.
[^4]: Abulafia, David. _The Great Sea: A Human History of the Mediterranean._ United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. 2011, p. 4; Broodbank, 2013, p. 122.
[^5]: Broodbank, 2013, p. 219; Tarrús, Josep. "La Draga (Banyoles, Catalonia), an Early Neolithic Lakeside Village in Mediterranean Europe." _Catalan Historical Review._ 2008. 1. 10.2436/20.1000.01.2.
[^6]: Wilkinson, Toby. _The Rise and Fall of Ancient Egypt._ United Kingdom, Random House, 2010, pp. 23—24.
[^7]: Broodbank, 2013, p. 87.
[^8]: Broodbank, 2013, p. 94.
[^9]: O'Connell, J. & Allen, J. & Hawkes, K. "Pleistocene Sahul and the origins of seafaring." _The Global Origins and Development of Seafaring._ 2010, p. 65; Clarkson, C., Jacobs, Z., Marwick, B. et al. Human occupation of northern Australia by 65,000 years ago. _Nature_ 547. 2017, pp. 306–310.
[^10]: Braudel, Fernand. _Memory and the Mediterranean_. United States, Knopf, 2001, p. 25; Sen, Sevket & Barrier, Eric & Crete, Xavier. (2014). Late Pleistocene Dwarf Elephants from the Aegean Islands of Kassos and Dilos, Greece. Annales Zoologici Fennici. 51. 27-42.
[^11]: Broodbank, 2013, p.108.
[^12]: Strasser, T. F., Panagopoulou, E., Runnels, C. N., et al. "STONE AGE SEAFARING IN THE MEDITERRANEAN: Evidence from the Plakias Region for Lower Palaeolithic and Mesolithic Habitation of Crete." _Hesperia: The Journal of the American School of Classical Studies at Athens_, 79(2). 2010, p. 145.
[^13]: Broodbank, 2013, p. 152.
[^14]: Pliny, Natural History, [36.67.](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0137%3Abook%3D36%3Achapter%3D67)
[^15]: Nemo, L. [_The eruption of Mount Vesuvius turned this ancient victim's brain to Glass_.](https://www.discovermagazine.com/planet-earth/the-eruption-of-mount-vesuvius-turned-this-ancient-victims-brain-to-glass) _Discover Magazine._ 2020, Jan. 23.
[^16]: Swaminathan, N. [_Point-and shoot Obsidian Analaysis_.](https://www.archaeology.org/issues/118-1401/trenches/1609-obsidian-xray-analysis-shortcut) _Archaeology Magazine._ Feb. 2014.
[^17]: Abulafia, 2011, p. 6; Broodbank, 2013, p. 156.
[^18]: Moutsiou, T. "A Compositional Study (pXRF) of Early Holocene Obsidian Assemblages from Cyprus, Eastern Mediterranean." _Open Archaeology,_ 5(1). 2019, pp. 155-166.
[^19]: Broodbank, 2013, p. 154.
[^20]: Holtzman, B. [_Corfu's Reed Raft, the papyrella_](https://indigenousboats.blogspot.com/2020/02/corfus-reed-raft-papyrella.html). _Indigenous Boats SMALL CRAFT OUTSIDE THE WESTERN TRADITION_. 2020, February 12.
[^21]: Sampson, A. "The Mesolithic Hunter-Gatherers in the Southeastern Mediterranean and Their Contribution in the Neolithisation of the Aegean." _Archaeology and Culture._ 1. 11. 2018.
[^22]: Cherry, J. F., & Leppard, T. P. "Experimental archaeology and the earliest seagoing: the limitations of inference." _World Archaeology,_ 47(5). 2015, pp. 740–755.
[^23]: Abulafia, 2011, p. 14.
[^24]: Broodbank, 2013, p. 154.
[^25]: Martinelli, M. & Vianello, A. "Lipari (Aeolian Islands) Obsidian in the Late Neolithic. Artifacts, Supply and Function." _Open Archaeology._ 5. 2019, pp. 46-64.
[^26]: Abulafia, 2011, p. 7; Broodbank, 2013, p. 154.
[^27]: Tykot, R. "Geological Sources of Obsidian on Lipari and Artifact Production and Distribution in the Neolithic and Bronze Age Central Mediterranean." _Open Archaeology._ 5. 2019, pp. 83-105.
[^28]: Broodbank, 2013, p. 218.
[^29]: Broodbank, 2013, p. 215.
[^30]: Broodbank, 2013, p. 187.
[^31]: Broodbank, 2013, p. 177.
[^32]: Leping J. & Li L. "[The discovery of an 8000-year-old dugout canoe at Kuahuqiao in the Lower Yangzi River, China.](http://antiquity.ac.uk/projgall/liu305/)" _Antiquity,_ 79. 2005, p. 305.
[^33]: Broodbank, 2013, p. 214.
[^34]: Broodbank, 2013, p. 214.
[^35]: Braudel, 2001, pp. 84-85; Fenwick, V. "Robert Newall's Primary Record of the Prehistoric Ship Graffiti at Hal Tarxien, Malta: new thoughts on their significance." _International Journal of Nautical Archaeology_, 46: 415-426.