---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/maritime-history-podcast/02-episodes/series-1-the-bronze-age/003-predynastic-boating-in-egypt-s-desert/"}
---

tags: #podcastepisode

# Introduction

Ahoy crew and welcome back to the Maritime History Podcast. This time around we have Episode 003 - Predynastic Boats in the Egyptian Desert.

The title doesn’t really leave much to the imagination, and if you listened to the end of our last episode you’ll have heard that today we now turn our focus south, leaving the Ubaid People behind to look at what was contemporaneously happening in Egypt.

The timelines don't match up perfectly. The Ubaid Period in Mesopotamia began fairly near to the beginning of Egypt’s Predynastic Period, we can say round about 6000 BCE. But, the Ubaid Period concluded before Egypt’s Predynastic Period did, so we will have some overlap with timeframes and such as we navigate the coming episodes. The Ubaid Period in Mesopotamia concluded around 3700 BCE, but today as we consider Egypt, we will be examining the millennium from 4000 to 3000 BCE. Where it makes sense to allude to events elsewhere I’ll certainly do so, but you’ll have to wait until future episodes before I can fill in some of the blanks at higher fidelity.

All right then. Egypt. Everyone already has a mental image forming in your mind’s eye at the simple mention of ancient Egypt, no doubt about it. Most of the memorable and glamorous Egyptian visuals are from later in their history than you might imagine. And whatever particular place or icon or artifact you’re imagining right now, there’s also probably some type of connection we could make between it and the water. The Nile River, specifically.

# The Neolithic Nile

It might be a trope at this point to mention that the historian Herodotus wrote down the same view that many ancients held. Namely, that the very land of Egypt was a gift to the Egyptians made by the Nile River. (Herodotus, _Histories_, 2.5.) Egypt is the “gift of the Nile,” as many folks say today.

In the paragraph from his _Histories_ where Herodotus made this point, he is also focused on the alluvial deposits made by the Nile in its Delta. Greek sailors in the classical period sailing south to Egypt across the Mediterranean could bring up the rich black mud deposited by the Nile River when they dropped sounding lines more than a day’s sail north of the river mouth, which is just amazing. That of course calls back to a point from our first episode, too. The alluvial deposits of the Nile have buried much of the artifacts and archaeology of the Nile Delta region, unfortunately. (Wilkinson, Toby. _The Rise and Fall of Ancient Egypt._ United Kingdom, Random House, 2010, pp. 23—24.)

For our talk today that issue is thankfully not a big concern. I’m sure there are artifacts buried in the muddy Nile Delta that would contribute much to our current understanding, but for now we simply work with the information available.

Back to the Nile. Herodotus likened the river to a gift-giver bestowing the gift of life upon Egypt itself. Many modern historians liken the river to a conduit or a highway, a backbone, even. And all of these analogies are apt. I also like to think of it as the lifeblood of Egyptian civilization, with a current running south to north that continually flowed and kept the people there alive and their culture flourishing for millennia.

At one point in the even more distant prehistoric past, the Nile was maybe not quite as necessary. Today it cuts through what is otherwise just the Sahara Desert. But in the Mesolithic, there were more consistent summer rains that kept seasonal pastures and cattle herders in business away from the Nile itself. But, after 5000 BCE the climate of the region began to shift and as the rains became unreliable, the desert crept in. ([[Unprocessed Zot Notes/@WardSacredsecularancient2000\|@WardSacredsecularancient2000]], p. 4.) Eventually only the Nile remained, and as the climate moved, human population was also forced into the narrow band of of verdant growth that traced the banks of the Nile following its reliable seasonal flood. (Wilkinson, 2010, p. 11.)([[Unprocessed Zot Notes/@KröpelinClimateControlledHoloceneOccupation2006\|@KröpelinClimateControlledHoloceneOccupation2006]], p. 4.)

# Nile Geography

Now while the early cultures of Mesopotamia were not hemmed in by an expanding desert that forced them into close contact with the Tigris and Euphrates, they still tended to gravitate toward those rivers, as we discussed in our last episode. The fertile soil that these rivers created is one big similarity between Mesopotamia and Egypt as both cultures had major rivers at their heart. ([[Unprocessed Zot Notes/@BroodbankMakingMiddleSea2013\|@BroodbankMakingMiddleSea2013]], p. 269) Likewise, in both civilizations, the river was a conduit for travel and for the growth of society, both in terms of culture and in terms of commerce.

In terms of geography, the Nile River needs perhaps the least description of any river on earth, it is so recognizable and widely known that it is basically synonymous with Egypt. It is over 4,000 miles (6,500 km) long. Because it flows from south to north, it drains into the Mediterranean and it's at the delta where the sediment deposits are a factor, as we said earlier.

But, another important aspect of the Nile is that the prevailing winds blow from north to south, while the river flows in the opposite direction. Any boat could then easily travel north, but then because the wind could be harnessed, Egypt developed the sail pretty early compared to other civilizations. This allowed a boat that had travelled north to then just hoist a sail and journey back south with the wind at its back. ([[Unprocessed Zot Notes/@BertmanHandbooklifeancient2003\|@BertmanHandbooklifeancient2003]], p. 252.) The two rivers in Mesopotamia flowed north to south, but the winds also blew in the same direction, so use of the sail was never much of a possibility when it came to travel on the Tigris or Euphrates. As such, we see much less evidence of sail usage there than we will eventually see in Egypt.

The ancient civilization of Egypt was so closely tied to the Nile that its effective boundaries aligned with the navigable portions of the Nile River. The effective southern border of Egypt was an island defensive post just downstream of the First Cataract, it was a place known as Elephantine. It's possible the name derived from the fact that the ivory trade was strong in the area, but it is also possible that the name ties to the shape of the island itself, it looks a bit like an elephant tusk. ([[Unprocessed Zot Notes/@WilkinsonRiseFallAncient2010\|@WilkinsonRiseFallAncient2010]], p. 20.) (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:%C3%8Ele_d%27%C3%89l%C3%A9phantine_in_the_1809_Description_de_l%27%C3%89gypte.jpg)

Anyway, Elephantine was basically a fort on an island of the Nile, but it was also used as a place to transfer cargo that was being transported. So it was an important center for Nile trade over the course of Egyptian history. It was also viewed as the border between Egypt and Nubia, to the south, so we'll likely discuss it again in the future, although it was not quite so central during the earlier stages of Egypt's development.

The main point I was driving at is that the Nile river has a series of six cataracts, basically rocky stretches of the river where whitewater rapids exist in places. The first of these is near Elephantine, but more of them continue to the south, and as you can imagine, the really hindered navigation, and especially large-scale trade to the south. Hence the effective southern border of Egypt. (Strabo, Geographica, Book XVII)

The northern border of the river was known as the "Reed thicket," a literal name that of course comes from the marshes that dominate the alluvial delta region where the Nile drains into the Mediterranean. ([[Unprocessed Zot Notes/@BroodbankMakingMiddleSea2013\|@BroodbankMakingMiddleSea2013]], p. 77-78.)

Beyond these two extremes, the Nile was a relatively predictable and navigable river, so let's now dive in to see how exactly the ancient Egyptians used the river, and how it fit into their worldview and societal development.

# Egypt’s Oldest Boats: Reed & Wood

That last mention about how the ancient Egyptian’s called the north limits of their civilization the “Reed Thicket” is a good segue, because reeds were rather central to the earliest navigation on the Nile, just as they were central for the Ubaid people in Mesopotamia. And, just as in Mesopotamia, we have very little direct archaeological evidence for reed boats and floats that the Egyptians used. But we have much indirect evidence about reeds and boats in predynastic Egypt.

One piece of evidence is the purely linguistic evidence, in this case the very word that was used to denote boat building during the Old Kingdom period. As we will see in the future, wooden boats were widespread by the Old Kingdom period in Egypt. But, at that time the word for building them was a word that meant something like the concept of binding with rope, and such a term grew out of the way that reed boats were once built. (Breasted, 1917, p.5.) Take a bundle of reeds and use some cord to bind each end tight, it’s about as simple as you can get, besides a log boat, of course. 

There's actually a perfect depiction of ancient Egyptian workmen building a reed boat, a depiction found on the wall of a 5th Dynasty tomb in Saqqara. Some of the workmen are shown busy cutting the papyrus which is used to make cordage, while others use their outstretched feet as a lever to bend the ends of the papyrus reeds back toward the middle of the boat. They then take the cordage cut by their fellow workers and use it to tie off the ends and give the papyrus boats their distinctive shape, so the binding of the reed boat here perfectly aligns with the predynastic terminology for boat building. (McGrail, 2002, p. 21-22.)

Now, we will also come to see in future episodes, there’s more about the way that Old Kingdom wooden boats were built that involves ropes being pulled tight, but there is still this great linguistic link that binds ( see what I did there, eh ) prehistoric reed boats through to their evolution into wooden boats. 

There is also the glaring visual fact that Egyptians preserved the shape of papyrus reed boats as they moved into constructing larger wooden vessels. (Braudel, 2001, p. 76) Reed boats are frequently depicted in Egyptian artwork from all periods of Egypt’s history, really, but as we will see in great detail going forward, Egypt placed much importance on the visual and symbolic aspects of boat building. Because of this, they seem to have tried to preserve the essence of their oldest papyrus reed boats in the way that they built later vessels, including both ceremonial vessels, but also in practical ways too.

There are dozens of examples of papyrus reed boats depicted on pottery as far back as the Naqada II period, dating to 3300 BCE. One striking depiction follows the same form and style. Onto light tan clay jars, ancient Egyptians used a brownish red paint to paint boats and other scenes. Most of them feature narrow hulls formed by two gently curved lines that terminate in basic ends. Many depictions have a palm branch at one end of the boat, though it is hard to tell which end is the bow and which the stern. Regardless, the boats also contain what appear to be removable shrines, normally two of them are shown. They also contain a pole set up on the end opposite the palm branch, displaying a banner or standard of some type. These banners are rather intriguing, and scholars have identified at least 49 distinct banners that appear.

Some scholars believe that these were identifying markers to tie a boat back to its home port or town, but other scholars identify these banners more as religious symbols used by early priests. Boats have been closely associated with Egyptian rituals, as we'll discuss in more depth later. So it would make complete sense for unique banners to be religious symbols of some kind, and perhaps the reed boats depicted on these jars were used in in symbolic journeys of the gods on the Nile. (Vinson, 1987, p. 103.) But with symbolism from prehistory, we are left to guess without any real concrete proof. One of the banners resembles a series of hills or mountains, so perhaps there is a more geographical connection. Or perhaps it's even a blend of geography and religious symbolism both!

Now I really appreciate the boat depictions on these Naqada II jars, but in the grand scheme, they comprise a minority of the boat depictions we have from predynastic Egypt. Egypt before it was unified and before the pharaohs grew to their full strength, its central focus of activity and culture was much further to the south than you might realize. Upper Egypt is where the vast majority of our archaeological evidence comes from for the predynastic period. The one caveat in this is one we've already seen - silt buildup in Lower Egypt and the Delta has buried much of the archaeological evidence we might find there, so perhaps we have a wildly incomplete picture that skews the focus to Upper Egypt.

That said, let's go ahead and consider the evidence that we do have beyond these Naqada II painted jars.

# Desert Rock Art Boats

Another big group of boat depiction evidence comes from an area that might seem unexpected. As we said earlier, the Nile is the central focus of Egyptian culture and civilization, but between the Nile and the Red Sea, to the east, is a vast desert known quite literally as Egypt's Eastern Desert.

Egyptologist Toby Wilkinson dubs the Eastern Desert “the crucible of Egyptian civilization,” a label I really like. (Wilkinson 2010, p. 10) It’s true, the desert to the Nile’s east was a focal point for the inhabitants of Egypt long before the pharaoh’s were ruling and the kingdom periods became the way mark the evolution of Egypt's history. In prehistory, what is today a desert was back then a savannah where prehistoric humans hunted wild animals and herded cattle. Images of these activities are carved all over the rock walls of the Eastern Desert's wadi cliffs. Over time of course the savannah dried up and Egypt's population was forced into the Nile Valley, as we said.

But, the wadis where all these rock wall carvings can still be found were the remnants of even deeper geological change, back when more water flowed from the Red Sea east and west. Those water channels dried up even before man was forced into the Nile River Valley, but in the interim they left markers of their culture. Even after the aridity of the Eastern Desert took hold, the wadis would still fill with water during occasional rain events. But keeping in mind this deep historic connection between the desert and its past more watery disposition, maybe now we can appreciate more why boat depictions are prevalent on the cliff walls of today's Eastern Desert.

Egypt's people of course kept adding depictions to the desert rock walls over their entire history, so only a fraction of boat depictions on the rock walls of the Egyptian desert are clearly from predynastic times. One scholar puts a number of somewhere between 15 and 20% as the total that are from prehistoric Egypt (Lankester, 2013, p. 204), of course then leaving the rest as depictions left during pharaonic times or even later on. There are reasons for this, of course. The eastern desert and wadis were links between the Nile River and gold mines, plus other mineral sources. We'll see in upcoming episodes how Egypt even traversed the Red Sea and how their boats and ships dealt with the desert.

Ultimately, it is not too beneficial to get lost deep in the weeds of predynastic boat depictions in the desert. From a few in-depth studies of wadis there, scholars have concluded that boat depictions were likely rare things, prehistoric Egyptians were not living there, but rather were leaving depictions on occasional visits to the desert. The depictions may have harkened back to activity that was more common in the east before widespread climate change, but even in predynastic time closer to the emergence of the the Egyptian pharaohs, dwellers of the Nile valley seem to have made trips to the Eastern Desert to hunt. Trips out of the Nile valley that was becoming the backbone of Egyptian civilization, these trips away from the Nile were feasible only for the emerging elites, so boat depictions and other ritual iconography left in the Eastern Desert is most likely the evidence of activity undertaken by the privileged emerging elite of early Egypt. (Lankester, Francis David, “Predynastic Egyptian rock art as evidence for early elites' rite of passage”,  _Africa: Archeology & Arts_ [Online], 12 | 2016, posted on December 15, 2016, consulted on July 14, 2023.)

Obviously boats were used in this context, but it is also clear that the predynastic rock art depictions were not made to be literal artistic representations. We'll encounter this issue much more going forward, how we can untangle artistic representations of boats from what they most probably were in reality. It can be tough. Nevertheless, the ultimate conclusion overall is that desert boat depictions from before Egypt's unification were somehow seen as sacred depictions connecting the land of the living and the Nile River to the desert that had emerged, where the dead were buried and where hunting and resource gathering could be pursued by those with the means to do so. (Lankester, “Predynastic Egyptian rock art as evidence for early elites' rite of passage”,  *Africa: Archeology & Arts*, 12 | 2016)

The depictions themselves show similar styles of boat, though not literal depictions, as we said. But they do tend to follow a few similar styles, and many of them are quite similar to the reed boats that are depicted on the clay jars from the Naqada II period. Some versions are more square, others more curved, and some have a hull that is a smooth sickle-shaped curve. There are in-depth studies to try and weave a coherent analysis from examination of the numerous styles with their various unique aspects, but for me, the high-level point is what we've said. Papyrus reed boats were widespread in pre-historic Egypt, such that they became an elite symbol that was over time absorbed into their religious iconography too. More to come as we move forward though!

# Tomb 100, Gebel el-Arak, and faint links to Meso 

### Tomb 100 at Hierakonpolis

The high-level view of boat depictions in Egyptian desert rock art is helpful, but zooming in to consider specific examples that come from more revealing contexts is of much more use for me, so let's do that now. To do so, we're going to weave in a few additional strands of discussion, so hopefully it all comes together coherently!

The main strand, or at least the one to build from here, concerns a mural painted on the wall of a pre-dynastic tomb found at Hierakonpolis, dated to roughly 3400 BCE. This city on the Nile's west bank was a cult center of a falcon god that later came into focus as Horus, but in many ways Hierakonpolis was the center of Upper Egypt during the end of the pre-dynastic period. That importance is partly why this mural painting is noteworthy. The tomb where it was found is called Tomb 100, so that will be my shorthand going forward here.

When Tomb 100 was discovered in 1899, it had already been looted by grave robbers. In the late 1800s, the forces of Egyptology and imperialism had kicked off the fever pitch of Egyptian artifact hunting, so by the time Tomb 100 was discovered everything had been looted and many of the wall paintings had been damaged or were deteriorated beyond visibility. This one wall painting, though, had somehow survived and it was removed and brought to the Cairo Museum for further study. Which brings us to this discussion today, yet more study.

The scene painted in Tomb 100 depicts a procession of six boats, probably traveling on a river, although it is not fully clear; 5,000 paintings did not quite aim for realism. The boats are by far the largest elements of the mural, but scattered around them are many smaller images of women dancing, men fighting, and people alongside animals.

Five of the six boats are readily identified with the common Egyptian papyrus reed boat of predynastic times, the style we have discussed from other depictions already today. But, the sixth boat is nicknamed the ‘black boat’ because it is quite unique. It has one high vertical end and an oar near the front, unique traits that have led some scholars to call it a foreign boat. It is also shown with a dark, almost black hull, while all other boats are a very light tan color.

There is much debate and disagreement about what the black boat means, where it comes from, and then if the mural as a whole portrays an event of some kind or if it is merely an accretion of symbols that were prevalent in predynastic Egypt. Some scholars have concluded that the black boat is tied to Mesopotamia, even, and that the mural depicts the arrival of this foreign ship, implies a confrontation, and then indicates that a prehistoric Egyptian ruler emerged victorious. (@CaseTomb100Decorated1962) But much of the interpretation hinges on assumptions about which directions the boats are even traveling, something that is actually quite difficult to decipher given that these are two-dimensional representations of boats for which we have no physical remains. Conclude that the black boat is facing opposite the rest, then perhaps it makes more sense to see it as fleeing.

But conclude that it is traveling in the same direction as the others, and then we are left to ask why. I am most convinced by another scholar's theory that the boats and all the various scenes and symbols around them may not have been painted at the same time. Many of the desert rock art scenes we briefly discussed earlier are clearly made up of scenes added by new artists over the course of centuries, adding pieces on to pre-existing art. Here, it is entirely possible that the boats were the original pieces, and that over time everything else was woven in. It is also entirely possible that the "black boat" was originally like all the others, only being painted over and revised later on, perhaps to indicate that it is the most important boat, maybe to connect it with the owner of the tomb or with a sacred procession. (@HuygePaintedTombrock2014)

So with the Tomb 100 mural, I have effectively dismissed the idea that it depicts a foreign boat. But let's explore another predynastic artifact that also draws much discussion about whether or not pre-dynstic Egypt may have had ties with Mesopotamia. It loosely relates to Tomb 100 becuase the "black boat" depicted there bears a striking resemblance to the boats on an ivory knife-handle from Gebel-el-Arak.

### The Gebel-el-Arak Knife

Right off the bat with this artificat, I'll confess that it may be misleading to say it is from Gebel-el-Arak, which is an archaeological site in Upper Egypt. Many now think that the artifact can be tied to Abydos, but when it was sold to a curator at the Louvre back in 1914, the dealer who sold it claimed it was found at Gebel-el-Arak. (@PittmanConstructingContextGebel1996, p. 10) Obviously the original location is meaningful, but to a degree I can't help but feel that it's a potato/potahto situation. The bottom line is that this artifact was found in a central area of importance for predynastic Upper Egypt, and the images depicted on the knife handle are just fascinating.

The handle itself is ivory from the tusk of an elephant, with various images carved in relief on both sides. For us, the front side of the handle contains the images of a more maritime importance, though we'll look at the back side too here in a bit.

At the top of the knife-handle, we can see two rows of human figures engaged in physical combat,  some wielding clubs or maces, and others engaged in literal hand-to-hand fighting. Below these figures is our focus today--two rows of boats or ships. From the context, most scholars have assume that they are also engaged in combat. We can't see any actual indications of combat between the boats the way you might think of triremes ramming one another during a battle, but we do see that between the two rows of boats, more human figures appear, this time shown with a horizontal orientation, arms and legs flailing, almost as if falling overboard.

The boats themselves are very intriguing. The upper row are all alike, boats with high ends very reminiscant of the "black boat" from Tomb 100. The only big difference is that the knife-handle boats have both ends with raised points, while the Tomb 100 "black boat" has only a single raised end. We'll get to the interpretation, or my stab at such, here momentarily. The bottom row of boats on the Gebel-el-Arak handle are boats even more similar in style to those we have seen today. They have much more gently curving hulls with no raised ends, and they also have some type of light cabin structure on the deck. Basically, these boats are extremely similar to all the other boats found in the Tomb 100 wall painting, and they also mirror the form and shape of those found on clay jars from the period, the same ones we discussed earlier.

So what do these two types of boats really signify in the context of predynastic Egypt's history? That is the crux of the question. Two main academic camps really exist. One camp believes that they signify an invasion of Upper Egypt by a foreign fleet and enemy, possibly even a maritime invasion from Mesopotamia. The other camp believes that the presence of these high-prowed boats are only evidence that visual styles and icons were transferred between Mesopotamia and Egypt during the prehistoric phases of both regions, but nothing more.

### Gebel el-Arak interpreted: Egypt/Mesopotamia









# Nag el-Hamdulab

- Conclude with discussion of this site. Appears to basically be the bridging evidence between pre-dynastic and “dynastic.” Shows first images of pharaoh presiding over “Following of Horus” event with boats that bear similarities to Naqada vessels, but also include the kingship imagery

# Conclusion

  

- Open with Herodotus quote comparing Mesopotamia to Egypt and focusing on the Nile; similar reed boats in predynastic Egypt; rock art depictions in eastern desert; then focus on potential cultural “bleed” between two areas with Gebel knife (similar to Warka Vase), tomb 100 depictions, and the Naqada II depictions showing pre-dynastic similarities and growth of Egypt