---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/a-few-artifacts-illustrate-prehistoric-maritime-influence-from-mesopotamia-to-egypt/"}
---

#### Gebel el Arak Knife

“Most dramatic is an Egyptian ivory knife handle that shows, on one side, a classic Mesopotamian contest scene with a man between two lions, and on the other, what seems to be a naval battle between what are recognizably Egyptian boats and other boats that look as though they had been lifted straight from a Mesopotamian cylinder seal. If this is a representation of an actual event—a moment when Mesopotamian and Egyptian boats could be seen side by side—what were Mesopotamian boats doing in Egypt so early? For that matter, how could they have got there? No waterways connected Mesopotamia and Egypt; a Mesopotamian who wanted to go by boat to Egypt would have had to carry his boat from the Euphrates in Syria to the Mediterranean. The other option, to sail south to the Persian Gulf and right around Arabia and north up the Red Sea, would still have required that the boat be carried across the desert from the Red Sea to the Nile. The knife handle is a mystery. A few scholars have even claimed that it is a fake. It’s true that it was not found during an organized excavation but was purchased in Cairo. But most believe it to be authentic: it is similar to other prehistoric Egyptian knives in minute points of detail, and it is not the only evidence for Mesopotamian contact at this early date.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 54](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=79&annotation=BDA2FQSZ)) 

#### Hierakonpolis Tomb 100

“Hierakonpolis was decorated with a scene that includes a Mesopotamian-style hero subduing two animals, along with a lone high-prowed Mesopotamian boat sailing alongside five crescent-shaped Egyptian boats.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 55](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=80&annotation=UHTQSKJ8))

“Perhaps some Egyptian merchants traveled to Mesopotamia and saw the boats there, along with the niched walls and clay cone mosaics on the public buildings, and they admired the animal contest scenes in the art. They then acquired some Mesopotamian luxuries, cylinder seals and lapis lazuli (imported from farther afield) and some decorative clay cones, and returned home. It’s just as possible, however—maybe a little more so—that Mesopotamians visited Egypt.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 55](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=80&annotation=NVXX4ZVW))

“But no references to Egypt appear in Mesopotamian records for centuries. Beyond the Egyptian objects at Ebla and Byblos, communication between the two great civilizations seems to have been very limited in the third millennium BCE.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 56](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=81&annotation=7YKSNW29))

“So step back now for a moment to look over this region extending from Egypt and Crete to the Indus Valley and what is now the far eastern border of Afghanistan. In what was the Early Dynastic period in Mesopotamia, populations across this area spoke very different languages and worshiped different gods. Some built temples to their gods and others did not. Some buried their dead in separate tombs and some in mass graves. No doubt other customs varied just as widely. But all the lands of this region were in contact with one another through trade, even if only indirectly, and the luxury goods that leaders and other rich men and women acquired must have made the long journeys worth all the hardship. It had become very important to kings to distinguish themselves from their populations.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 56](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=81&annotation=2AWCWYZ9))

“with the ostentatious display of goods that less affluent people in their kingdom couldn’t possibly acquire: objects made of colorful and exotic materials that came from hundreds or even thousands of miles away.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 57](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=82&annotation=PH4SCBE6))