---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/a-high-level-summary-of-boat-building-and-the-place-of-watercraft-in-ancient-egypt-s-history/"}
---

“By the later Old Kingdom, an autobiographical inscription brags of building a 30-meter-long freighter in only seventeen days, a feat that demonstrates not only the speed with which large hulls could be built, but the king's power to command the resources and laborers necessary to do it.

As the state's power increased during the Early Dynastic Period, it also increased its visible manifestations through building monumental structures. Narrow, fast vessels like those buried at Abydos were not intended to transport heavy loads, but ebony tablets from Early Dynastic tombs at Abydos feature large, rounded cargo carriers that could have moved grain, laborers, or even building materials. The slender Abydos vessels are yet another expression of state wealth and power made physical; the carriers met practical demands for transporting the huge stones needed to erect monumental structures or the food to sustain workers and were themselves revolutionary feats of engineering. One technical demand drove another, and the craftsmen of Egypt quickly developed sophisticated solutions to problems of water transport. 

Water transport allowed the builders of the Early Dynastic temple at Hierakonpolis to incorporate granite from Aswan and facilitated the construction of an entire temple of stone by Khasekemwy (Dynasty 2).” ([Ward, 2000, p. 137](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=145&annotation=6REUTJTZ))

“Models, texts, and representations testify to many different kinds of Egyptian watercraft, but excavated Egyptian watercraft provide evidence for only two branches of hull construction: sturdy, durable cargo carriers and elegant ceremonial hulls. Cargo carriers, exemplified by the Lisht timbers and the Mataria boat, were broad and shallow hulls designed to transport heavy goods. In contrast, the ceremonial Abydos, Khufu, and Dashur vessels were intended to carry people (or gods) and perhaps funeral equipment, so they were more lightly built and proportionally narrower. Despite these differences, the two hull types shared many design features. Thick planks with joggled edges, fastened by a combination of mortise-and-tenon joints and ligatures or lashing, created shallow vessels, built up plank by plank around a central section.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 137](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=145&annotation=EX2WTYRH))

“The expense of worked wood, particularly that of large planks used in building watercraft, was a driving force in the development of Egyptian nautical technology. For ceremonial vessels, raw materials were an even greater expense, because imported conifer timber from Syria was so highly prized. References to wood from older, broken-up hulls in dockyards make it clear that wood was stored for reuse in other watercraft. Some planks in the Cairo Dashur boats were used once before, and a beam from the Carnegie Dashur boat is so much older than than other timbers that it probably also was resused.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 139](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=147&annotation=7AYXCTFT))

“Similarities between planks at a single complex could be explained by the reuse of timbers from. a single massive freighter, but the repetitive vocabulary of shapes across four sites and 150 years illuminates part of the great web of Egyptian bureaucracy. Scribes in the shipyard monitored every scrap of wood and sharpened metal tool; a society so obsessed with bookkeeping and balancing accounts logically would plan ahead for the day when a vessel's planks were no longer fit for service in a hull but could meet other needs of the state.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 139](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=147&annotation=8SK5EDBN))

“Reuse of timbers and standardized shapes were not the only issue that influenced construction methods. Egyptian hulls seem specifially designed to allow disassembly. Khufu I provides the finest, and least controversial, example of this practice. Hieroglyphs on battens covering plank earns in the Khufu ship match those on planks where the battens fit, suggesting step-by-step instructions. Unlike sewn hulls elsewhere in the world, the Khufu vessels relied on transverse lashing across plank surfaces rather than lashing along plank seams. Ropes used for the transverse lashing passed freely in and out of V-shaped channels; ropes threaded through drilled holes along plank seams required pegging at each drilled hole to prevent longitudinal slippage. Hulls with transverse lashing could be quickly reassembled with about one-fifth the cordage required for similar-sized hulls with lashing along longitudinal seams.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 139](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=147&annotation=M9SGGAUS))

“The classical author Diodorus and an early- nineteenth-century traveler in Egypt record the Egyptian practice of building ships, taking them apart, transporting them across land, and reassembling them where they were needed.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 139](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=147&annotation=7272RM39)) (see Diodorus Book II, 16)

“Obsidian has proved to be a good indicator of trade with Arabia and the African coast; Egypt became part of a network that linked East Africa, Arabia, the Indian subcontinent, and Mesopotamia during the predynastic period. Naqada, Hierakonpolis, and Abydos controlled access to the routes across the Eastern Desert, and probably held near monopolies on the ships that traversed the Red Sea. Power associated with the redistribution of imported goods such as obsidian, incense, silver, sea shells, and lapis lazuli contributed to the dominance of those cities in the Early Dynastic Period. The prestige of these sea journeys became part of the potent symbolism watercraft acquired. Descriptions of overseas voyages occur throughout the dynastic period as well. A few royal monuments also provide illustrations of the laden hulls returning successfully from dangerous journeys. References to seaborne trade with other nations are many, including the lament of a shipwrecked sailor from the Middle Kingdom.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 140](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=148&annotation=N2PX2XQU))

“Unfortunately, we are unable to directly compare Egyptian and Mediterranean hull construction because no seagoing Egyptian nor riverine Mediterranean craft have been excavated. Comparing Egyptian river boats and Mediterranean ship construction, especially across 500 years, would be like comparing apples and oranges. In addition, the earliest excavated Mediterranean ship dates to Egypt's Dynasty 18 (c. 1318 B.C.), a time for which we have no remains of Egyptian craft of any kind. Comparisons between the two traditions can highlight contrasts in shipbuilding philosophies, but it is impossible to tell whether the distinctions we see relate to time, vessel type, or cultural and economic factors. The late Bronze Age Uluburun shipwreck near Kas, Turkey, is the oldest excavated Mediterranean seagoing hull. The lack of frames, along with the presence of a thick central timber and several edge-joined planks, recorded but not yet fully studied, demonstrate methods of hull construction similar to the nautical technology of Egyptian shipwrights who built river craft. Both the Uluburun and excavated Egyptian river vessels used thick central strakes, not keels. Some New Kingdom models and representations, however, illustrate a projecting central timber on seagoing and so-called "travelling" vessels, as well as on the obelisk barges of Hatshepsut. Christopher Monroe has suggested that these projecting timbers provided longitudinal stability and rigidity.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 140](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=148&annotation=EVXF5JMV))

“Another visible difference between the two building styles is in the method of fastening planks together. Both styles used deep mortise-and-tenon joints of about the same width, but the Uluburun joints are 4 centimeters deeper. In addition, Uluburun shipwrights drove pegs 2.2 centimeters in diameter through each joint. Egyptian shipwrights avoided piercing the hull planking below the waterline; mortise-and-tenon joints in river craft were wedged side-to-side to forestall longitudinal slippage but offered less resistance to lateral forces.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 141](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=149&annotation=TVYN3XDC))

“One of the most technologically advanced and economically powerful cultures from the ancient world evolved along the banks of the Nile River and drew its strength from the vessels that plied its waters. The earliest attempts at crossing its waters may have been made on bundles of reeds gathered at the river's edge. Buoyant reed bundles tied together served many purposes in Egypt, from fishing and hunting hippopotamus to providing platforms for ritualized mock battles between boat crews or ferrying the dead to immortality. But our first representations of watercraft seem to be connected to warfare and domination. It is possible that the twelve unexcavated Early Dynastic hulls at Abydos may commemorate the role of swift, long, and narrow vessls in the formation of the state; their burial attests to the immense wealth of its early rulers.

When they built Khufu I more than 4,500 years ago, Egyptian shipwrights translated the simple papyrus raft into an extraordinary work of art and complex engine ring that reverberates with the majesty of a state so powerful that it could afford to build a 43-meter-long hull of imported wood and bury it beside a pyramid for eternity. The dedication of resources becomes even more awe-inspiring when we realize that another disassembled and three complete, but now vanished, vessels surrounded Khufu's pyramid. While the wood type and dimensions of the unexcavated Khufu II hull are unknown, its deckhouse was about the same size as that of Khufu I, made of cedar, and shares at least some component dimensions, suggesting a ship of similar size, requiring a similar investment of labor and capital. 

The rock-cut, brick, and small wooden hulls and boat graves located in pyramid complexes of the later Old Kingdom testify to decreased wealth, possibly as a result of a drier climate and slowly deteriorating economic and social conditions. After Khufu, the next known boat burials date to Dynasty 12, when one of the most powerful groups of rulers in Egypt's history held the throne. At Dashur, five, or perhaps six, cedar papyriform boats paid tribute to the recently dead Senwosret III and honored, through emulation, the legendary rulers of the Old Kingdom. A planked model only a fifth the size of the Dashur hulls buried outside the tomb of a highly respected official at Lisht suggests that the Dashur hulls represent a comparatively large investment. 

Also at Lisht, and other Middle Kingdom pyramid complexes, are the remains of working vessels built of sturdy, straight, short planks, fastened together with deep mortise-and-tenon joints and ligatures, and reinforced with walls of wood intricately connected in a framing assembly. The massive construction of such hulls allows us to comprehend more easily the incredible transportation and engineering feats involving stone monuments weighing hundreds of tons.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 141](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=149&annotation=HZHY6PUH))

“The traditions of thick planks, joggled edges, and fastening by deep mortise-and-tenon joints survive in Egyptian hull construction through the end of the sixth century BCE and, with the substitution of nails for mortise-and-tenon joints, into the present. An abandoned freighter, stripped of its internal timbers and left on a small branch of the Nile near Mataria provides evidence for a departure from past principles of hull construction. For the first time, fastenings included elements that passed through the thickness of planks. Not all joints were pegged, and the pegs, or treenails, may also have fastened frames to the hull, but one of the identifying characteristics of dynastic Egyptian hull construction had irrevocably changed.

The remains of twenty different ancient Egyptian vessels probably represent only five of more than one hundred documented types of watercraft that carried people, cattle, gods, obelisks, and foreign traders on the Nile between 5,000 and 2,500 years ago. By studying how these hulls were built, and where they fit into the fabric of society, we gain some sense of the complex solutions to practical problems developed by Egyptian shipwrights. Whether swift warships, giant cargo carriers, wooden imitations of flimsy papyrus rafts, or heavily laden seagoing vessels, Egyptian watercraft incorporated design and technological features as complex, and durable, as those of the more visible stone monuments of ancient Egypt.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 142](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=150&annotation=DRCWHKHG))