---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/a-summary-of-how-diplomacy-evolved-in-the-near-east-late-bronze-age/"}
---

“Initially, the kings seem to have used diplomacy to accumulate allies in order to fight against one another, as well as to acquire luxury goods that weren’t available at home. The desire for luxury goods didn’t change, but, for a few centuries in the late second millennium BCE, peace and brotherhood, not military strength, became the goals of diplomacy. During the Amarna period, the letters were mostly about gifts, ambassadors, and marriages, with almost no discussion of war at all. This is probably, in part, because the lands of the great kings were too far away from one another for the types of constant battles that took place in Hammurabi’s time. But diplomacy had also been separated from war. The peace treaties seem to have been effective, so that the kingdoms were usually at peace.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 306](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=331&annotation=3V9NBRWW))

“Over time, more and more of the world (at least the Near Eastern world) was seen as familiar and predictable in its behavior. The more foreigners one saw on the roads—traders, envoys, itinerant craftsmen, translators, couriers and so on—the less alien they must have seemed. Artists adopted motifs from other lands, and the royal families became increasingly international. Everyone involved in this system seems to have benefited in some way.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 307](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=332&annotation=RTNGZQYU))

“It all eventually came to an end during the twelfth century BCE, but not because of a tyrant managing to overthrow the diplomatic system, or even because of the aggressiveness of the Assyrian kingdom. All the major powers, one after another, fell or went into decline. Mycenaean and Hittite cities were abandoned or burned, Ugarit and other Canaanite cities were destroyed, Kassite Babylonia was conquered by the Elamites, the Assyrian kingdom shrank in size and importance, and even New Kingdom Egypt eventually collapsed. The cause of this crisis has been the subject of many books. Suffice to say that it was probably largely natural in origin—climate change, famine, or disease (or a combination of all three) set off a series of events that proved unstoppable.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 307](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=332&annotation=QM3CVWVK))

“The Near East is often described as the birthplace of law, home to the earliest cities, and the “cradle of civilization.” It was also home to the first diplomats and to the first kings to discover the benefits of peaceful coexistence.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 309](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=334&annotation=GVMLWQXB))