---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/archaeology-relative-chronology-and-stratification/"}
---

Every archaeological site uncovers a series of layers from different ages, each with its traces of human activity. Ideally, one would wish to dig down to virgin soil, to the earliest occupation of the site. In Crete for example, on the site of Knossos, fifteen metres represents the vertical distance between the present day and the seventh millennium B.C. (the beginning of the Neolithic, when the island was apparently first occupied by humans). Every excavation therefore creates its own chronology: “this” must have happened before “that.” The difficulty lies in matching one chronology with those from other sites and in charting that elusive “absolute” chronology which is the dream of every archaeologist. 

There are several approaches to this task, the most sensational of which has been radio-carbon dating, devised by the American chemist William F. Libby in 1946. This enables us to date things as far back as 60,000 years ago. Plants, animals and humans all absorb during their lifetime a certain amount of radioactive carbon, which is progressively lost from their remains. This loss is measurable and becomes a sort of retrospective clock, with some margin of error, some exceptions, generally self-evident, and some astonishing results, which can be verified when they coincide with those obtained by other means. The problem is that carbon dating has not been applied to all sites, and the results of excavations still under way may not be published for some time. So archaeological knowledge is always in a state of flux. But even Sherlock Holmes sometimes had to abandon his first hypotheses and start again. ([Location 667](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=667)) (Braudel 2001, p. 18-19)