---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/assyria-s-taxation-of-sea-trade-at-places-like-tyre-was-a-marriage-of-imperial-command-economy-with-mercantile-cities/"}
---

“Yet in productive terms Assyria needed the Mediterranean, and the economic growth of both was more symbiotic than is often recognized. Inland parts of the Levant suffered the most. It was from these that farmers and builders were deported to Mesopotamia, replaced by victims of devastation elsewhere to create an innocuous, largely rural population. But even here Assyrian policy assiduously supported, and indeed boosted, the cash-cropping of oil and wine, from upland growers to lowland processing units.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 509](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=476&annotation=A5IXQF3N))

“Given its maritime impotence, Assyria’s strategy was to tax the profits of a sea trade it could never hope to control where it came ashore, at select ports watched over by forts and imperial functionaries. For a long time this formalized version of the concentrate-and-bleed approach to Levantine sea trade, first employed by later 2nd-millennium BCE Egyptian and Hittite rulers, proved highly effective. Gaza blossomed where Arabian camels met Mediterranean shipping. Owing to high overland transport costs, Levantine oil and wine were not siphoned off as direct tribute, but instead permitted to flow overseas, as before, which yielded more profit in taxes (Assyria, until recently still a beer-dominated zone like the rest of Mesopotamia, met its escalating demand for the latter from the nearby Jazira and Zagros). This swelled Ashkelon to a harbour city of 10,000-12,000 people. But the supreme marriage of convenience between imperial command economies and mercantile cities on the sea was enacted at Tyre.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 510](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=477&annotation=3MX6AXW5))

“Not until the altered conditions of the later 7th century BCE would this pragmatic imperial leniency towards the lynchpin of Mediterranean maritime trade run out.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 511](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=478&annotation=DSA6ZBYP))