---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/athens-and-sparta-supplanted-corinth-and-aegina-as-the-scale-of-maritime-trade-changed/"}
---

“Increases in scale shed interesting light on the rise and fall of seafaring centres in the Aegean. When most traffic was internal, Euboean locations on the Euripos strait connecting the northern and southern Aegean did extremely well, and it was they that began to re-establish wider connections. Their demise came in the 7th century BCE, as trans-Aegean routes to the central and west Mediterranean became more important. The concomitant rise of isthmian Corinth made doubly good sense, given its position between the Aegean and the Gulf of Corinth, a sheltered seaway to the central Mediterranean, and the size of shipping, which remained moderate enough to enable the transhipment of medium bulk cargos, or transport of ships themselves over the isthmus. Corinth even invested in a slipway, or *diolkos*, between its two coasts. On the strength of this route, and combined with its primacy in the Saronic Gulf, nearby Aegina also took off. The limitation for both lay in gradual rises in ship size, in particular for grain transport, because the solution of digging a canal across the isthmus was beyond Corinthian means (the depth of the modern cutting testifies to the challenge). The ensuing rise of Athens and Sparta marked the triumph of places nearer to the circum-Peloponnesian sea-route, and of the economic and military big battalions that a larger, and in the former case silver-rich, territory could marshal. That this sequence was far from arbitrary is underscored by Bronze Age parallels in the same part of the Aegean: from a mega-site at Manika on Euboea in the age of internal canoe traffic, to Aegina’s primacy in the early 2nd millennium, to the rise of Mycenaean territorial states with their windows on the sea – the differences being the lesser role of Corinth, and the absence of truly large-scale shipping.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 550](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=516&annotation=GM2ZLUIP))