---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/boat-evolution-on-the-nile-river-is-the-best-through-line-example-of-the-evolution-of-sail-usage-and-adaptation/"}
---

#USE in [[Maritime History Podcast/01 Episode Transcripts/Series 1 - The Bronze Age/(OLD) 005 - Meanwhile, In Egypt...\|(OLD) 005 - Meanwhile, In Egypt...]]

“The best evidence, however, comes from the Nile. There can be no doubt that boats had been part of life on the river for millennia; deep-channel fishing and riverboat models had a long history, while the Egyptian language contains over eighty words for watercraft. Moreover, unlike the rivers of Mesopotamia, the Nile was a perfect experimental laboratory, in which the current conveyed boats downstream, while the prevailing winds from the north, with something to catch on, could propel them back up against the flow. About 3500 BCE, large angular boats appear in upriver imagery, with deck cabins, long steering oars at the rear and bristling with paddlers. Plank-built construction is proven by the discovery of fourteen such craft buried at Abydos in around 3050 BCE, one over 17 m (55 ft) long. The Abydos boats were oddly held together by cross-hull lashings, a relic of reed-bundle craft, or possibly connected to the need to dismantle ships for desert carriage to the Red Sea or around Nile cataracts. Their wood was poor, mainly local sycamore, acacia and tamarisk. Although such boats are depicted and excavated in association with royal ceremony and fighting, they surely also played a less glamorous role in shifting goods, tribute and grain up and down the river.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 290](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=267&annotation=B3MTIARF))

“A few of the images sport  palm fronds or banners mounted in the bows, and after 3200 BCE these quasi-sails were replaced by depictions of the real thing: square, forward-mounted and presumably linen, the most unimpeachable from an aspiring elite burial at Qustul far upriver in Nubia (another, better known example is unprovenanced and unfortunately may number among fakes made for the early 20th-century AD antiquities market). The adaptation of a riverine vessel into a seagoing craft able to handle the Mediterranean’s changeable winds and rough waves was far from straightforward. Nile craft had a shallow freeboard (which encouraged the retention of paddled locomotion), low manoeuvrability with the sail placed so far forward, and no keel. Quite where and when the conversion to marine conditions was effected is guesswork, but the likeliest answer is the Delta early in the 3rd millennium BCE, just as Egyptian *wadj wer*, or ‘[[the Great Green\|the Great Green]]’, began to connote the sea as opposed to Deltaic marshes. For over 2000 years sea traffic was received at river-ports inside the Delta, similar to others further up the Nile (as well as the Mesopotamian karum, originally a river quay), but thanks to the sea’s influx able to operate year-round, even when the river was at its lowest. Only in the 1st millennium BCE were harbours finally built out on the marshy, shifting coast itself.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 291](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=268&annotation=KL2PWV2B))