---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/braudel-s-theory-about-mycenaean-expansion/"}
---

Mycenaean expansion, if I am not mistaken, followed the upward trend of trade: it was a success related to the economic climate. And since that expansion was rapid, the area of the sea covered by Mycenaean shipping and influence first duplicated then went beyond the area of Cretan sway. They reached Rhodes and Cyprus, elbowing their predecessors aside, before moving on to the coast of Asia Minor, Syria, Palestine and Egypt, where their pottery was landed in great quantities at Amarna. They also travelled westwards: “Fragments of Mycenaean pottery are to be found almost everywhere in Italy.” The signs all point to a rapid and energetic expansion, perhaps using force, as was the case in the straits leading to… ([Location 2566](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2566))(Braudel 2001, 121)

It is logical to conclude, in the light of recent work on the Thera catastrophe, that the Mycenaeans were able to take advantage of the desolation produced in Crete to occupy Knossos, the only palace left standing at the heart of Cretan power. After all, the island had witnessed the destruction not only of many towns with great loss of life, but of several ports and settlements in the Aegean islands which were equally badly affected. There was a vacuum to be filled. The Cretan diaspora, probably in all directions, which followed these disasters, contributed in large measure to the rising star of Mycenae. Crete eventually attained comparative prosperity once more, but would never thereafter be more than a Mycenaean province. ([Location 2591](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2591))(Braudel 2001, 123)