---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/broodbank-s-theory-of-the-late-bronze-age-collapse-dynamics-that-avoids-a-simple-single-narrative-focus-on-the-sea-peoples/"}
---

#USE in [[Maritime History Podcast/01 Episode Transcripts/Series 1 - The Bronze Age/(OLD) 018 - The Beginning of the End\|(OLD) 018 - The Beginning of the End]] AND [[Maritime History Podcast/01 Episode Transcripts/Series 1 - The Bronze Age/(OLD) 019 - Ugarit in Flames\|(OLD) 019 - Ugarit in Flames]] AND [[Maritime History Podcast/01 Episode Transcripts/Series 1 - The Bronze Age/(OLD) 020 - The Sea Peoples Sail South (Volume II)\|(OLD) 020 - The Sea Peoples Sail South (Volume II)]]

“Born of dissatisfaction with the explanatory power of an overall narrative of [[the Sea Peoples\|the Sea Peoples]], if not necessarily denying the veracity of some of its constituent elements, envisages the problem in deeper and more structural terms. A useful start is to view the political fragmentation and, in certain regions, economic abatement within the long-term sequence of boom-to-bust cycles through which the Mediterranean’s and its neighbours’ polities and networks have passed ever since – and by no means the opening round in the east, as previous chapters have shown. Likewise, we might understand the successful infiltrations by central Mediterranean groups in terms of a paradoxical ‘advantage of backwardness’ that periodically favoured ambitious, less encumbered interests on the peripheral contact zone with an established but ponderous larger system, akin to the situation during the demise of the western Roman empire some 1500 years later. Equally, there is a certain truth to the idea that degrees of interconnection had reached an unfortunate level, sufficient to ensure that trouble could spread with alarming speed, but insufficient to enable an effective common response (even assuming that states of analytical self-awareness would have permitted this, which, as we shall see, is very much open to question).

However, we need something less generic to explain why the Iron Age resurgence would look in crucial respects so radically different from anything seen before. This requires setting aside the rhetoric of catastrophe, and instead thinking of burning palaces as problem-solving and enabling moments for certain kinds of people, the integral birth pangs of a new social and economic order, rather than a disastrous retardant to its emergence. Specifically, it suggests that the crisis marked the tipping point in a long-term shift from the institutionalized, centrally organized command economies of Bronze Age palatial states and proto-empires, and the elaborate royal ideologies and culture that pervaded them, to more flexible, uncentralized and freelance trading practices, largely in the hands of private individuals or consortia, decoupled from the political sphere and explicitly motivated by profit. For the latter, the rewards would ultimately outstrip the risks that came with the destabilization of the rudimentary monitoring and arbitration provided by the great powers and their vassals. Sea people in all their varied guises were in essence as much a consequence, and manifestation, as a root cause of this profound change.

As with most apparently sudden, seismic events, pressure had been building up for some time. By the Amarna age the monumental but cumbersome edifice of the Great Kings and their imitators had established a highly coherent economy at the top, driven by centrally controlled flows of raw materials of natural scarcity, etiquette-ridden exchange of enormous, subtly valued packages of royally manufactured ‘gifts’ and, in the case of Egypt and Hatti, militarily enforced tribute. Yet alongside this, we glimpsed in the Levant and on Cyprus the emergence, surely from earlier roots, of a more openly mercantile and less risk-averse sector, interested in speed of response to matters of supply and demand, as well as measurable returns. Although this operated in ostensible harmony with the royal palaces, or in their interstices, fundamentally it was in tension with their fixation on legitimacy and social order. We also identified a further challenge to palatial supremacy in the growing legions of sub-elite consumers. Their tastes were only partially met by trickle-down benefits, and elements of certain industries began to address them more directly. After Amarna such trends accelerated. Too much metal was circulating for central authorities to track and control it all, not least as fresh sources and styles of goods seeped in from the central Mediterranean; accumulations of scrap at Gelidonya, Tel Nami and in other hoards attest to increasingly informal means of acquisition and stockpiling, as much as uncertain times. Further technologies slipped palatial control, while subversive new ones arose, of which iron was the most defining; in the longer-term, the freed- up, mobile horizons of many skilled craftworkers that accompanied the waning of palaces was just as significant for Iron Age culture as the triumph of freelance trade. And a final consumer-driven phenomenon, again with earlier stirrings, was the undermining by local substitution of the quasi-monopolies on niche products that certain production centres had established in distant markets - a further twist to the comparative advantages of importation versus local production. A very telling example is the Aegean’s painted tableware and unguent containers, which the Argolid had successfully exported to the remainder of the Aegean, the central Mediterranean and mainly sub-elite markets in the east. By various junctures in the late 14th-12th centuries BCE most of that in use in all three regions was no longer imported but locally made, and acquiring connotations that sheered away from Aegean associations – a trend that, incidentally, makes such pottery treacherous as a tracer of postulated Aegean migrations.  

As the network ballooned, ever larger gaps appeared in the web of royal reach, particularly at sea, and within these, different kinds of people began to flourish. These were at best fleetingly tameable as mercenaries, and soon openly running parts of the operation, from [[Lukka\|Lukka]] sea-raiders, *hapiru* and *shashu* during the 14th century BCE to ‘sea people’ in the 13th and 12th centuries. That the latter were regarded as more deadly merely indicates that by the late 13th century BCE the ability of the two systems to coexist had been overwhelmed, as new modes of practice penetrated more domains of former royal prerogative or violently intercepted the interactions upon which palaces relied. The crescendo of destruction, dislocation and horror stories penned by the scribes of frantic kings around 1200 BCE was but the inevitable collateral.

One strength of this revisionist interpretation is that it explains something that the traditional version cannot, namely why some kinds of people and places survived or even flourished through the crisis, while others dwindled. The Bronze Age world of controlling palatial elites was gone forever from the Mediterranean, but the reality that replaced it was more complicated than a black-and-white contrast between rising merchants and toppled kings, triumphant subalterns and castdown elites, or dynamic cities and failing empires. A glance into the immediate and longer-term future reveals that plenty of royal houses endured, while differentials of wealth counted as much as ever (even if in some areas on a diminished scale), and empires would soon be back in more rapacious forms. At the heart of the matter, beyond the mayhem, was rather the degree to which those at the top, whoever they were and however they had got there, could extricate themselves from investment in the previous status quo, and decouple from the institutions and pretensions that had hitherto shaped political and economic values: not so much who ruled, as how, on what basis and within what remit.

Translating this into patterns across the east Mediterranean, prior history did much to shape which social groups and regions initially performed most vigorously and abjectly under changing conditions. The buoyant coastal Levant and savvy trader-kings encountered by Wenamun, who both commanded local cedar like any potentate of old and bargained ruthlessly for advantage, emerged out of a long coexistence of royal houses and merchant entrepreneurs in the realms of sea trade, production and exploitation of the arable base. Something similar goes for the ascendancy of Cyprus, where Bronze Age kingship is less visible on the ground than an ebullient urban elite, and where even the messenger dispatched to Amarna had been a merchant rather than a royal envoy. At a more modest level, on Crete the early start to post-palatial society may explain another non-catastrophic transition; indeed, it is interesting to speculate whether Cyprus and Crete’s successes in this respect were attributable to their buffered insular status, non-palatial politics, or the shaping of the latter by the former. At those extremities of the Levant that had felt the pressure of outside governance most keenly, the removal of overlords also created fertile ground for new orders to emerge, most clearly in the Philistine and Israelite zones, but maybe in Cilicia too. At a finer grain, lost local details must lie behind the vagaries of fate that, rather unexpectedly, saw the extinction of Ugarit, the source of so much insight into emergent entrepreneurialism, or the notably unruffled history of the Phoenician towns, which may be connected to their prior affiliations with ‘sea people’ networks in Cyprus and the Aegean. Lastly, the resilience of Middle Assyria until a delayed severe shrinkage in the mid-11th and 10th centuries BCE recalls the brash, then untimely realpolitik it had displayed in the Amarna age and its inheritance through Mitanni of several innovative industries in the Jazira, to which we might also add the last-resort option to retrench to a large, shock-absorbing riverine core. ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 467-70](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=437&annotation=F2MM5BL6))

“Conversely, the regions hardest hit were those unable or unwilling to adapt to changing circumstances. The crash of the Aegean’s last palatial polities was dramatic in its comprehensiveness, but otherwise small beer, given their peripheral location, modest scale and recent formation. Stunted mercantile development allowed them to be penetrated and outflanked along new routes by Cypriot and other freelance traders during the 13th century BCE, and weak ideological foundations in contrast to the earlier Minoan palaces left little else to sustain them. More telling was the fate of Hatti and Egypt, two principal architects of the hegemonic, universalizing order of the later 2nd millennium BCE, in which both were deeply invested, and both, as we saw in Chapter 8, with weakly evolved mercantile structures. In Ramessid Egypt, an internal trade in copper, corn, utilitarian goods and the laundered proceeds of tomb looting flourished, but Wenamun’s naivety illustrates the enduring dependency abroad on tradition rather than a grasp of market operations. It is likely that neither superpower could really diagnose what had hit them and their regulating regime, let alone fix it, and certainly their responses were all too predictable and ineffective. In the case of Haiti, the late rash of temple building in the capital looks like a devout misdirection of resources to keep the gods smiling. Likewise, a treaty with the Levantine vassal state of Amurru to ban trade between Ahhiyawa (whatever peri-Aegean polity this represented) and the Assyrian foe reeks of ponderous royal diplomacy desperately applied to the hopeless goal of managing the quicksilver operations of east Mediterranean trade. In the case of Egypt, we have seen how it demonized the threat in the stereotypical form of foreign attackers whom, in those telling words from Tanis ‘no one had ever known how to combat’, and over whom its victories seem, in hindsight, if not purely fictional at least superficial. In another 13th-century BCE illustration of conceptual mismatch, a chariot-borne pharaoh showed off his might by the visual metaphor of shooting an oxhide ingot (some 5 cm or 2 in. of copper) full of arrows, as if it could be slain like a human opponent - hitting the target but missing the point? Hatti collapsed but Egypt survived, a testimony in its own view to its primordial divine foundation and the strength of kings. Yet in reality, how different were their fates at this time? Both fissioned, and in each the parts that prospered were those closest to the Mediterranean and adjacent trade routes: Carchemish and other successor states in the northern Levant, and in Egypt not the refugium around holy Thebes, but the newly independent dynasties of the Delta.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 470-71](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=438&annotation=BW6F7TLD))