---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/byblos-likely-had-more-maritime-freedom-than-self-serving-egyptian-depictions-may-indicate/"}
---

### relationship between Byblos, Ebla, and Egypt

“The growth of maritime trade along the Levant raises an inevitable question. Egyptian priority in the introduction of sail technology to the Mediterranean is not in doubt, nor is the reality of royal convoys from the Nile during the 3rd millennium BCE. But can we take pharaonic decrees as a complete reflection of who controlled traffic up and down the coast? Were all Levantine people depicted in the Egyptian ships on Old Kingdom monuments in reality captives, and how soon did Levantine maritime communities with easy access to high-quality timber invest in construction of sailing ships themselves, perhaps further customizing them for Mediterranean conditions? In short, when did ‘Byblos ships’ start to have a Byblite or otherwise Levantine element in their ownership as well as design and route? The answer is likely to be increasingly so as the 3rd millennium BCE rolled on, and certainly by the late 3rd-millennium replica stone anchors were being dedicated at a new, thoroughly un-Egyptian tower temple at Byblos.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 303](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=280&annotation=NA96RGSS))

“Two stone vessels found in the palace at Ebla bear inscriptions in Egyptian hieroglyphs, though with no mention of how they got there. One is a fragmentary diorite oil lamp inscribed with the name of King Khafra. He was an immensely powerful Egyptian king who had ruled in the twenty-sixth century BCE, the builder of one of the Great Pyramids at Giza and the man whose portrait was used for the head of the Sphinx. The other is a fragment of the circular lid of a fine alabaster jar giving the name and titles of Pepi I, who reigned more than two centuries after Khafra and would have been a contemporary of perhaps the last of the Ebla kings, Irkab-damu’s son Ishar-damu” ([Podany, 2012, p. 52](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=77&annotation=XF3A7PX6))

“Byblos and Ebla were among the very few Near Eastern cities where Egyp- tian Old Kingdom goods have been found. Other than this, though, Egypt was surprisingly shut off from most of the ancient Near East during the closing centuries of the third millennium BCE, even though so much communication seems to have been taking place across much of Asia. It’s particularly odd because Egypt was enjoying a time of enormous wealth and prosperity. The kings seem to have had almost boundless riches and unprecedented control over their subjects, whom they conscripted to work on construction projects, the most conspicuous of which were the pyramids.  

“The western kingdoms included Byblos, which was perched on the Mediterranean coast to the southwest of Ebla. Byblos had uniquely strong ties with Egypt during this era, the Egyptian Old Kingdom, the time when the pyramids were built and the kings had godlike power over their subjects. The leaders of Byblos sent shiploads of cedar (for construction), along with cedar oil (which was used in mummification), to Egypt. So many Egyptian artifacts and royal inscriptions have been found at Byblos that some speculate it might even have been under direct Egyptian control.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 52](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=77&annotation=6RPCP47I))