---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/carthage-was-essentially-a-levantine-merchant-town-transposed-onto-northern-africa/"}
---

“We are surprisingly well informed about the circumstances and patently institutional nature of Carthage’s foundation, thanks to a relatively credible ancient testimony that drew on the now lost annals of Tyre, and recent excavation of the earliest phases, between the beach sand and later constructions topped off by fiery Roman destruction debris.  

The story began at Tyre with a factional dispute that drove Elissa, better known as Dido and both sister of King Pumayyaton (Greek Pygmalion) and wife of Melqart’s high priest, to flee with members of the city’s elite, picking up Astarte’s priest at Kition en route. Wenamun would have recognized this blend of gods, priests, powerful women, wealth and Cyprus, and the association with Kition underscores the parallels between both these ambitious, politically motivated, elite-led takeovers of key points for maritime communications. The legend’s sequel in North Africa is harder to evaluate, but archaeology is unequivocal concerning the venture’s ambition, and consequently the likelihood of prior familiarity with the location and its potential. Early Carthage covered 25-30 ha (60-75 acres) on and around the hill of Byrsa, which remained the citadel until the bitter end. It had one or more harbours, since lost to the alluviation that has pushed the coast out half a kilometre; the harbours visible today date back no further than the battle fleets of the Punic wars. Almost from the outset its houses were imposing, stone-built structures, soon separated by a circuit wall from an industrial zone for ironworking, purple dyeing and potting. To all intents and purposes this was a Levantine merchant town transposed, at this stage the only firm candidate for urban status west of Cyprus and the Nile Delta. The main uncertainty hovers, frustratingly, over precisely when it was founded. Ancient tradition was adamant in favour of 814-813 BCE, a date supported by radiocarbon against the early 8th-century BCE alternative proposed on the basis of pots of Aegean type found among local and numerous Levantine, Iberian and Sardinian imported wares – one dimension of another discrepancy between ceramic and scientific dating that haunts the opening centuries of the new millennium to the tune of fifty to seventy-five years. (Broodbank, 2013, p. 490)