---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/conquest-followed-the-flow-of-water-but-manifested-in-other-ways-due-to-the-different-geographies-in-mesopotamia-v-egypt/"}
---

“==The geography of Mesopotamia encouraged war.== Mesopotamia is geographically defined by its mountains in the north, its alluvial plains in the south, and the rivers that connect them. The existence of not one but two major river valleys promoted the development of multiple settlements; the fertility of the valleys generated wealth; wealth, in turn, incited competition and greed; and the flatness of the plains made individual communities vulnerable to attack. The net effect in the south was a coalescence of power through imperialism: Akkad absorbed Sumer, and Babylon absorbed both. Eventually, mountainous Assyria in the north—which had always been topographically separate from the south and, because of its terrain, more defensible—marched upon the south and conquered it, and then went on to build an even wider empire. To life in Mesopotamia, therefore, warfare was a natural condition. In Egypt, by contrast, the story was very different. There, there was one river, not two. The fertile singularity of the Nile and the forbidding deserts to its east and west promoted solidarity among the separate communities that grew up along the river’s narrow banks. Conflict did exist: between the kingdom of the river valley to the south (Upper Egypt) and the kingdom of the delta to the north (Lower Egypt). But once the king of the south, Narmer, conquered the kingdom of the north around 3000 B.C.E., Egypt was united and would remain so, free for most of its history from internal war and the threat of external invasion. ==The only similarity between the military histories of the two countries was that conquest followed the flow of water: in Egypt from south to north and in Mesopotamia from north to south.”== ([Bertman, 2003, p. 262](zotero://select/library/items/YPMHZBXL)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/X3CHJ4P3?page=275&annotation=PT39NI7K))