---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/crete-s-connection-to-egypt-and-other-cultures-gave-it-a-developmental-edge/"}
---

Unlike the rest of the Aegean, which in the third millennium was receiving almost everything from the west coast of Anatolia, Crete had contacts with Syria and, directly or indirectly, with Egypt. Was it for this reason that, even before 2000, this former poor relation of the Neolithic Aegean was developing an active, outward-looking and original civilization, reformulating for its own use its diverse borrowings from elsewhere? ([Location 2369](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2369))(Braudel 2001, 111)

It is now thought that Crete did not have direct links with the Nile in the early third millennium, the date when these vases occur in Egypt itself, but rather indirect links via Byblos. But was this a straightforward import trade, or did Crete allow entry to refugees from the Nile, who had travelled by way of Syria? And if so, when? At the time of the distant conquest of the Delta by Narmer? Or from the first intermediary period, in the twenty-third century, which witnessed so much looting of very ancient Egyptian tombs? Such theories might account for the penile sheaths which male Cretan costume included from a very early time (and which are thought to be characteristic of the Delta as much as of Libya); they might also explain the many pottery seals found in the Messara plain (at Hagia Triada), dating from the very early Minoan period, pre-2200, and directly imitated from seals of the first intermediary period in Egypt—themselves Asiatic in inspiration. Other specialists simply think that the Cretans who went to Byblos travelled on to Egypt with the local traders. ([Location 2376](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2376))(Braudel 2001, 111-12)

Cretan sailors were certainly familiar with the route to the Syrian coast. Cut off from the Aegean world, Crete looked towards Cyprus, Ugarit and Byblos; and through these places, it made contact with Egypt and Mesopotamia, without which any serious development would have been unthinkable. Crete was from then on enmeshed in a context of eastern civilization. ([Location 2394](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2394))(Braudel 2001, 113)