---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/currents-in-the-mediterranean/"}
---

#### Broodbank

“The Atlantic injection circulates anticlockwise in sweeping longshore currents and internal eddies (see map on pp. 8-9). Beaches in Gaza and Israel are made of redeposited African sand. Currents are typically sluggish, though at narrows they accelerate, at [[Gibraltar\|Gibraltar]] to 6 knots (11 km or 7 miles per hour), a serious obstacle to ships departing the Mediterranean until recently.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 74](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=72&annotation=CEKV678H))

#### McGrail

“Physically, the Mediterranean consists of two basins connected by the Sicilian channel (Strait of Carthage) and the Strait of Messina, and the general flow of the surface currents is determined by flows into these basins from the Atlantic and, to a much less extent, from the Black Sea. The main current flows eastwards from the Gibraltar strait along the Algerian coast; part of it then flows in a generally counter-clockwise circulation around the western basin, with local circulations around the islands. The remainder of the mainstream continues eastwards through the Sicilian channel to the east basin. From here a current flows generally east-south-east to the Nile delta, with some diversion into the Gulf of Sirte where there is a clockwise circulation. From the Nile delta a weak coastal current continues generally counter-clockwise, passing north of Cyprus and along the south coast of Turkey to the Rhodes channel. Within the Aegean there can be a northerly flow from Rhodes along the Turkish west coast, but generally there is a southerly flow due to the inflow from the Black Sea. The Black Sea itself has counter-clockwise flows on either side of the Crimean peninsula. Within the Adriatic there is a generally counter-clockwise circulation (Mediterranean Pilot, 5, 1988: map 1.132). In the summer sailing season these currents average 1 knot or less, except where they are channelled or otherwise constrained, and therefore accelerated, by the configuration of the coast or the seabed: for example, the Strait of Messina, the Sicilian channel, and the Strait of Bonifacio between Corsica and Sardinia.” ([McGrail, 2002, p. 92](zotero://select/library/items/LVPZGRY3)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85TAQ5UC?page=92&annotation=8WE6THLL))