---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/detailed-walkthrough-of-how-the-khufu-ship-was-constructed/"}
---

#USE

This general discussion of the oldest excavated and recorded Egyptian ship applies evidence of Egyptian shipbuilding practices used on other extant hulls toward a better understanding of this vessel's construction. Information obtained from vessels, texts, tools, and representations contributes to a reconstruction of standard methods used to build wooden ships and boats in ancient Egypt. 

Some ancient Egyptians boasted of building boats in inscriptions on their tomb walls, almost always including the vessel's type and length as primary descriptive elements. The wood used and the boat's width appear in some, but not all, documents and are of secondary importance. Traditional boatbuilders have used the same criteria throughout the ages," and it is likely that Khufu ordered his shipwrights to build a particular type of hull 80 cubits long. 

Once hull length was decided, shipwrights had to acquire suitable timber. Acacia forests and other native trees provided wood for boatbuilding, but additional, more exotic timber had been imported from the Levantine coast since the predynastic period. Most imported timber, fine stone, and metal remained under state control for much of the pharaonic period. In the Old Kingdom, the king alone commanded the resources necessary to build large watercraft. Although only a few of the Khufu hull components have been identified by botanists, it was primarily built of up to 23-meter-lengths of imported conifer timber, which Moustafa believes to be cedar. Even 1500 years after Khufu's ship was built, Egyptians still imported Levantine cedar logs, essentially tree trunks stripped of their branches.

Builders of the Khufu ship visualized the shape and dimensions of its planks before laying out the first timbers, the 12-meter-long midships section of the bottom. One shipwright marked prepared trunks for cutting, possibly with a simple brush dipped in pulverized charcoal or red ochre solution. First axed and sawn to rough shape, then trimmed by workers with adzes, the center plank of the midships section anchored the plank assembly (see Fig. 17). One of the most important steps in this early stage was the establishment of a centerline, marked by hieroglyphs, and probably used throughout the construction of the hull to check its curvature and symmetry. After finishing the center plank's edges, the shipwrights shaped and fitted the planks beside it with the assistance of coaks. Next, workers fastened plank edges together with mortise-and-tenon joints, beginning with the edges of the center plank. After chiseling mortises and inserting corresponding tenons, the builders accurately marked mortise locations on the inside edges of the outer planks with a twig or brush dipped in charcoal. The angle and placement of the mortise within the edge probably depended on grain patterns, desired curvature, and, of course, the shipwright's experience.

Forward and aft bottom sections were built up in a similar manner with the addition of shoring beneath the curving hull to support the 36-meter-long bottom. A few ligatures on the inner surface helped hold planks together near the ends. Especially small fastenings used to align the forward and aft sections with the central section are half the depth and less than half the width of other mortise-and-tenon joints in the hull. These open mortises were level with the inner planking surface and crossed butt joins (see Fig. 20). 

The next plank to be fitted was one of the smallest (7.2 m), most regularly shaped, and most important planks used in the sides of the ship: the central plank of the first side strake (P1b and Slb in Fig. 17). Planks in the midships area were critical in defining hull curvature, and the great concentration and close spacing of Vshaped lashing channels amidships both emphasizes the importance of the midships section and provides an indication of stresses within the vessel. The angle between this plank and the bottom was crucial in determining final hull shape. Mortise-and-tenon fastenings join the first strake to the hull bottom; with the transverse lashing and two pairs of ligatures, they directly link the bottom to the sides of the ship (see Fig. 19).

A mitered rabbet between the P /S1b planks and the bottom varies significantly along its length and required great care in its manufacture. This rabbet is perhaps the most complex single example of joinery visible in the ship today. It continues into the adjacent planks for a short distance, but the first strake end planks rest on top of the forward and after bottom sections for most of their length. Only where the plank ends approach midships did the shipwrights cut a rabbet and use mortise-and-tenon joints to fasten them to the edges of the central section. Ligatures secured curved scarfs between plank ends within the first strake; mortise-and-tenon joints were not used here.

Moustafa believed that planks at the ends of Pl and S1 were fitted first because of the direction of scarfs and bevels at their midship ends. Nevertheless, the complexity of the rabbet and the continual emphasis on the midships section of Egyptian hulls even into the middle of this century for adjusting the fit of frames, beams, and other components supports an alternative sequence. There is nothing inherent in those joins as published that would prevent the center plank being fitted first, and this sequence more accurately fits the evidence.

The midships plank of strake 2 was fitted next, fastened with mortise-and-tenon joints, tied in two places to the midships section of the bottom, and in one place to the aft section of the first strake. Mortise-and-tenon fastenings and ligatures joined the aft plank of strake 2 to the aft plank of the first side strake. In creating a planking plan like this, the shipwright was probably following a tradition also represented in the Dynasty V tomb of Ti, where a boat with a similar planking plan is under construction.

Next, the only plank in strake 3 was roughed out and a complicated series of joggles was cut along its lower edge. Mortise-and-tenon fastenings continued to be positioned above those in the planks below, creating internal lines of tenons across the hull. Ligatures fasten strake 3 to the forward plank of the first strake and to both planks of the second strake. The ends of strake 3 are not secured to surrounding planks.

The two planks of strake 4 were roughed out, fastened, and tied at stress points, probably with the forward plank fitted first. The last strake had its central plank fitted first. Its central plank is the longest in the hull. The central plank of strake 4 on the port side may have had a fault because the typically symmetrical placement of lashing mortises is not present on its after end. Scarfs joining plank ends in strakes 4 and 5 angle upward toward midships rather than downward as in strakes 1 and 2. Scarfs in strakes 4 and 5 also include mortise-and-tenon joints, a feature not seen in lower strakes.

It is likely that V-shaped lashing channels were cut after shipwrights completed the hull planking because they avoided mortise-and-tenon joints throughout the ship. Where mortise-and-tenon joint spacing is slightly irregular, the spacing between lines of lashing channels is also irregular. If the channels had been cut first, their spacing would have been more regular

Lipke has argued that if V-shaped lashing channels were located and cut at the same time shipwrights cut mortises in plank edges while building up the planking shell, the entire process would be simplified while at the same time conforming to the concerns noted above. Either scenario is possible, and as he has pointed out, Lipke's would allow the channels to be used, if needed, to maintain the vessel's shape. Cutting the lashing channels last, however, would involve a more cautious approach, one that I think can be justified repeatedly through studying hull details. For example, lashing through V-shaped channels was not used in planks less than 40 centimeters wide, probably because of the immense strain it placed on them.

Workers then laid battens along seam lines, across scarfs, and over most plank ends before threading preliminary lashing through Vshaped channels. Battens were marked both with hieroglyphs that matched signs carved into the inner surface of adjacent planks and with a glyph designating to which quarter of the ship it belonged. These signs would serve no purpose if the hull's builders did not plan for its reassembly.

After the hull was completed, a few deck beams maintained its rigidity while 16 floor timbers were cut and fit to its inner surface. Stanchions one on each floor timber, supported the carling which ran the length of the deck. Beginning with the pair of deck beams fore and aft of midships, shipwrights fitted deck beams into notches cut into the inner surface of the sheer strakes and the carling. Deckbeams were lashed in place. At this point, the backing timbers could be accurately fitted, joined, and tied on with lashing through ligatures if they had not been secured earlier in the process.

Lipke and Moustafa suggest that backing timbers were lashed to the ends of the hull before the planking was erected, using perhaps simple ladder braces like those used during the reconstruction to support these heavy, unwieldy timbers. Their weight, if unsupported, is significant and could easily distort the curvature of the bottom section. Because both scenarios are possible, it is not possible to say anything definitive about the sequence for attaching backing timbers, but support for putting on the backing timbers last may be offered indirectly by the model building process Moustafa used to learn how the ship was constructed. A photograph shows him holding unattached backing timbers next to one end of the ship which already was planked to strake 4; the other end has no backing timbers, indicating that the backing timbers were not necessary to hull integrity

After all the major elements of the vessel were in place, shipwrights completed the transverse lashing. A scene from the tomb of Nefer and Ka-Hay (c. 2400 B.C.) illustrates this process (see Fig. 3). Rope encircles the boat four times and is laid over a forked stanchion amidships before being wrapped around the ends. A worker tightens the ropes around the boat by twisting a stick, and I believe that the standing figure is shown pulling transverse lashings tight. If not tightening the lashings themselves, he is tightening the rope truss in preparation to do so. The man to his right is striking the rope with what seems to be a stone. This final tightening of cordage would have been crucial to the hull's integrity. At this stage, stringers and their supports ran beneath the deck beams, backing covers, decking, superstructure, finials, oars, and fenders completed the hull. ([Ward, 2000, p. 58](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=66&annotation=H2ACVC2T))