---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/ea-nasir-is-also-a-great-example-of-mesopotamian-merchant-trade-with-dilmun-and-other-regions/"}
---

“A successor to Lu-Enlilla continued trading on behalf of Ur’s temple of the moon god Nanna, but he traveled to [[Encyclopedia/02 Places/Dilmun\|Dilmun]] rather than Magan. His name was Ea-nasir, and he was not just a “seafarer”; he bore a more specific title than that of Lu-Enlilla. Ea-nasir was a “Dilmun trader.” We know quite a bit about him from Sir Leonard Woolley’s excavations in the city of Ur.  

Ea-nasir lived in a neighborhood of medium-sized houses in Ur, about a hundred years before Hammurabi came to the throne. In his house Ea-nasir kept some of the letters that had been written to him when he was in Dilmun, and they were still there on the floors when Woolley excavated. Woolley (somewhat idiosyncratically) named the streets of Ea-nasir’s neighborhood after the streets in England; according to him, the Dilmun trader lived at No. 1, Old Street.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 99](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=124&annotation=J3A7VP8X))

“But Ea-nasir wasn’t in Ur all the time. Like Lu-Enlilla before him, he seems to have traveled regularly, taking his boat to Dilmun, loaded with textiles and silver to pay for vast quantities of copper. One tablet mentions a shipment of 13,000 minas (pounds) of it. He also brought back other items, such as small objects made of carnelian, lapis lazuli, white coral, gold, and ivory that he could easily sell in Ur; the ivory and carnelian probably came to Dilmun all the way from South Asia. Ea-nasir traded not only on behalf of the temple but also for private individuals, and the letters that he kept show that they weren’t always happy with the copper that he procured for them. One man wrote in a fury to complain that Ea-nasir had shown his messenger poor-quality copper and had then refused to show him anything better. The writer was incensed: “Who am I that you are treating me in this manner and offending me? . . . Who is there among the Dilmun traders who has ever acted against me in this way?” Those “Dilmun traders”—a whole group of merchants who shared Ea-nasir’s specialized knowledge of boats, sea travel, copper trading, and fi nance, and who, presumably, had a familiarity with the language of Dilmun—provided an important resource for the Mesopotamians. They seem also to have made a good living. Ea-nasir’s neighbors included a scribe, a metalworker, and a cook; they no doubt heard from Ea-nasir about his travels. Dilmun would not have seemed quite so exotic or distant when he regaled them with his tales. In fact, for a brief time it seemed that Dilmun might become part of the diplomatic world of Syria and Mesopotamia.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 101](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=126&annotation=X3QHFJCR))

“Dilmun doesn’t seem to have remained a part of the diplomatic world of the Mesopotamian and Syrian states after this one expedition—trade was the glue that tied it to Mesopotamia, not diplomacy—but Shamshi-Adad’s expedition marks an intriguing attempt at extending that world. One wonders what the Dilmun officials thought of the Mesopotamian cities they traveled through and what sort of reception they received. Did the kings exchange letters? Had the Dilmun king sent any sort of gift for Shamshi-Adad? If so, this exchange might have been comparable to Shamshi-Adad’s relationship with those kings of Tukrish and the upper lands that he mentioned receiving “tribute” from.  
Later, Hammurabi seems to have disrupted the Dilmun copper trade when he took control of Ur. He might have moved the “Dilmun traders” to a different town, or perhaps another neighborhood in Ur. In any event their documents, if they existed, haven’t been found. Dilmun’s heady days of prosperity seem to have been coming to an end by this time. The Mesopotamians increasingly turned away from their old southern partners when seeking luxury goods, and toward the north and west.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 103](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=128&annotation=PLBUBIIC))

“This might sound, at first glance, like an overland version of Ea-nasir’s trips to Dilmun, and it might indeed have been similar. But whereas only a few cuneiform tablets attest to the Dilmun traders’ lives, around 23,000 tablets have been found that were written to expedite the Assyrian trade in Anatolia. And whereas Ea-nasir seems to have worked for the temple in Ur, the Assyrian traders were independent entrepreneurs, beholden neither to their king nor to a particular temple. The southern cities were, by now, powerfully dominated by their kings, but power in Ashur had traditionally been held by the city itself, as a collective authority. This gave entrepreneurs an opportunity to work much more autonomously than would have been possible in Babylonia.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 104](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=129&annotation=WM7TNC46))