---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/early-seaborne-trade-in-southern-mesopotamia-was-driven-by-both-lack-of-local-natural-resources-and-by-the-demand-for-luxury-goods-that-developed-as-social-structures-evolved/"}
---

“Southern Mesopotamia lacked basic resources such as timber, stone, and metal ores (copper and tin) needed by the city states of the early third millennium BC for their monumental buildings and for their craftsmen; and this need led to external trade both with the high lands of Anatolia and the Iranian Plateau around the headwaters of the two rivers, and also with overseas lands accessible through the Persian Gulf. Furthermore, the hierarchical nature of Sumerian society stimulated the demand for non-utilitarian exotic products which led to the import of luxury goods by an overland route from China and by overseas routes from such places as the Persian Gulf, the Horn of Africa, and the Red Sea coasts, and possibly India. ([McGrail, 2002, p. 55](zotero://select/library/items/LVPZGRY3)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85TAQ5UC?page=55&annotation=4W9DGJW5))

### Mesopotamia lacked stone, timber, and minerals; this encouraged foreign trade, as did the need for luxury goods

“The critical resources that Mesopotamia largely lacked were building stone (except in Assyria where gypsum was available), construction-grade timber, and minerals, including copper and tin (needed to make bronze), iron, silver, and gold. Combined with the demands of an increasingly affluent society and the desires of its rulers for splendor, the scarcity of these resources encouraged foreign trade and the rise of a merchant class as the Mesopotamians exchanged agricultural produce and textiles for the commodities they lacked. As a result, caravans plied regular overland trade routes throughout the Middle East and ships sailed up and down the Persian Gulf. Timber was hauled in from the Zagros Mountains and Lebanon; copper and tin from Anatolia, the Caucasus, and Iran; silver from the Taurus Mountains; and gold from Egypt and even India. From Afghanistan came a precious blue mineral called lapis lazuli. Ships were sailing as early as the fifth millennium B.C.E. between Mesopotamia and ports in Bahrain and Oman, and as early as the third millennium B.C.E. between Mesopotamia and the Indus Valley. So great was the influence of Babylonian merchants that their Akkadian language and cuneiform script became tools for international commercial and diplomatic correspondence throughout the ancient Near East.” ([Bertman, 2003, p. 5](zotero://select/library/items/YPMHZBXL)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/X3CHJ4P3?page=18&annotation=CPTJ53DR))

“Missing also, especially in the south, were two other resources: stone that could be quarried and cut into building blocks, and trees that could yield sufficient timber for large-scale construction.” ([Bertman, 2003, p. 255](zotero://select/library/items/YPMHZBXL)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/X3CHJ4P3?page=268&annotation=BE6U2BJQ))
### ancient Mesopotamia imported many goods as society stratified and luxury goods grew in demand

“To clothe themselves in the trappings of affluence, the ancient Mesopotamians initiated trade directly with the lands that possessed the resources they needed and, in addition, dealt with intermediaries who could supply them with these commodities. From these sources they also sought luxuries they lacked and raw materials that could be crafted into objects of fine art. From Anatolia and Iran they imported tin. From Bahrain and the Arabian coast they obtained copper, gold, ivory, pearls (called “fish eyes”), and a delicacy known as “Dilmun onions.” From the territories that are today Oman and the United Arab Emirates they secured copper, diorite, ochre (for cosmetics), ivory, and semiprecious stones. From the African coast came gold, ebony, ivory, and carnelian; and from Phoenicia (today’s Lebanon), timber (especially cedarwood) and aromatic oils. According to a poem, imported elephants and apes once jostled in the main city square of Akkad in the 23rd century B.C.E.” ([Bertman, 2003, p. 255](zotero://select/library/items/YPMHZBXL)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/X3CHJ4P3?page=268&annotation=JR4LNMF8))

“Mesopotamian ships were navigating the Red Sea by around 3000 B.C.E. and, even earlier, plying the waters of the Persian Gulf. There were also trade links with the far-off civilization of the Indus Valley, a prime source of carnelian and other semiprecious stones. Afghanistan was the ultimate source of lapis lazuli, a mineral for jewelry and ornaments, one that traveled over 1,300 miles to reach an eager Mesopotamian market. By the late 15th and early 14th centuries B.C.E., trade routes stretched to pharaonic Egypt, Syria, and the Hittite Empire of Turkey, enriching with their profits such commercial cities as Ugarit and Ebla in Syria and Mari in northern Mesopotamia.” ([Bertman, 2003, p. 255](zotero://select/library/items/YPMHZBXL)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/X3CHJ4P3?page=268&annotation=2WTZRFZS))