---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/early-mycenae-was-heavily-influenced-by-crete-at-its-height-and-egypt/"}
---

But the lessons were quickly learned. In Argos the newcomers were introduced to the network of established links, in particular with Crete. The island, just then on the crest of a wave of prosperity, was a beacon for the Cyclades and the nearest mainland coasts. In the eighteenth century B.C., potters on both mainland and islands, possibly émigré Cretans themselves, began to imitate Cretan models, in the so-called Camares style: seals, jewels, and decorative Minoan motifs were exported and copied. In the fifteenth century, a uniform culture of Minoan inspiration, linked to the Middle East, spread throughout the southern Aegean, so that it is often impossible to tell whether an object found at Phylakopi, say, on Melos, or at Aegina, Mycenae or Pylos was imported from Crete or produced locally. Mycenae is the most striking example of this process. Since the city asserted itself over the other cities of Argos, the term Mycenaean has become the standard name for the whole civilization. In fact, that civilization really took off during the period of the new palaces in Crete: witness to its splendour are the princely tombs in Mycenae which have been found intact: they date broadly from the sixteenth century B.C. (with a few somewhat older ones and others from the early fifteenth). It is curious to find in them, alongside the preponderant Cretan influence, very clear traces of Egyptian influence too. It is true that between 1550 and 1470–1450, the Mycenaeans and Cretans seem to have engaged in friendly exchange as well as trading side by side, not only in the Aeolian islands, where their pottery has been found in close proximity, but also in Rhodes, where the Mycenaeans appear to have intermingled with the Cretan colony, and even in Egypt, where documents mention Keftiu (Crete) and “the Islands in the Middle of the Great Green,” a term thought to refer to all the non-Cretan Aegean islands, plus the Peloponnese. ([Location 2543](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2543))(Braudel 2001, 120)