---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/egyptian-boats-in-rock-art-are-perhaps-not-realistic/"}
---

Boat petroglyphs dated to the predynastic are almost always shown without any visible means of propulsion, and crew which are rarely shown, are indicated by short lines ( _op. cit._: 72). Boats are often portrayed in a completely unrealistic context integrated into hunting scenes and intermixed with human hunters, dogs and their quarry. Vessels are also seen being dragged by human figures or with a tow rope, but with nobody manning it. Usually the number of draggers would be insufficient to pull a real boat on water or land (fig. 7). Many more are portrayed in the desert rather than near the River Nile, whereas we might expect a greater number by the cataracts and areas of shoals ( _op. cit.:_ 81). The presence of boats in the desert as part of the dominant hunting motif and their ability to move through the desert suggest that they perform an important liminal function.

It is the subject matter rather than the existence of rock art in the Eastern Desert which excites comment. The presence of hunting scenes dating from a moister time period is not surprising, but their subject matter is. Rather than realistically showing wild animals being hunted, the petroglyphs most often depict fauna unrealistically and many times in association with, or integrated into, tableau containing boats and the 'dancing' figure. Not found in the Nile Valley outside of El Kab-the 'gate to the wilderness,' the integrated scenes and associations appear different to rock art near to settlements. These more commonly show cattle, and boats without the association to hunting (Judd 2009). The apparent 'strangeness' and unrealistic nature of the petroglyphs can be explained as showing the liminal zone between this world and the next.

In utilizing the liminal space members of the valley elites could go 'out there' to engage in hunting far away from the everyday environment. There they mastered the conditions and fauna, and probably sourced magical products such shells, ostrich eggs and feathers, greywacke for palettes, and gold (Lankester 2013). They returned to the valley settlements as heroic figures with supernatural power separating them even more in political stature from the mass of ordinary peasants. It is noteworthy that many of the images in the rock art are also shown, sometimes in different form rather than theme, on pottery found in graves in the Nile Valley. It is therefore likely that the desert was seen as the land of the dead as well as that of the wild.

Lankester, Francis David, “Predynastic Egyptian rock art as evidence for early elites' rite of passage”,  _Africa: Archeology & Arts_ [Online], 12 | 2016, posted on December 15, 2016, consulted on July 14, 2023. URL: http://journals.openedition.org/aaa/920; DOI: https://doi.org/10.4000/aaa.920