---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/egypt-and-the-hittites-continue-to-clash-into-the-reign-of-ramesses-ii-peaking-at-the-battle-of-kadesh-1275-bce/"}
---

“Mursili II died around 1282, but the hostility between Egypt and Hatti didn’t die with him. Throughout the first decades of the thirteenth century they regularly sparred over territory. Within the borders of the empires, though, the lands were prospering. Ugarit, Amurru, and Carchemish flourished in Syria under Hittite rule, and the Hittites built a new capital city called Tarhuntassa, closer to the center of their kingdom. Egypt was in the capable hands of a new dynasty of pharaohs—the Nineteenth—all descended from a general who had taken the name Seti I. One remarkable pharaoh dominated almost the whole of the thirteenth century. This was Ramesses II, whose sixty-seven-year reign was one of the highpoints of Egyptian history. He too built a new capital city, and named it Per-Ramesse after himself.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 303](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=328&annotation=BBZ6989K))

“In 1275 BCE, the armies of Egypt and Hatti finally clashed. Thousands of soldiers on both sides fought near the city of Kadesh, which had so often been the site of hostilities. This time the great kings themselves led their armies. Ramesses II was enormously proud of this battle and often recounted it in texts and images in Egypt. Oddly enough, though, he doesn’t seem to have won—Kadesh remained in Hittite hands. If Ramesses didn’t actually lose the battle, then one can only conclude that the kings fought to a draw. This proved to be a good outcome for both Egypt and Hatti. Convinced that neither could hope to overcome the other, they eventually agreed to a peace treaty.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 303](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=328&annotation=8JL4H74R))