---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/egyptian-sacred-texts-reveal-their-view-of-boats-in-practical-terms-and-in-mythical-terms/"}
---

“In addition, the OId Kingdom *Pyramid Texts* and Middle Kingdom *Coffin Texts* each contribute to a comprehensive study of ancient Egyptian watercraft. The Old Kingdom spells allude to thirty-two different types of boats, including celestial vessels sailed by the gods and the stars, earthly boats for the king, boats of divine justice and taxation, transport boats to bring food to the king in the other world, and funerary boats. One study of the boats in the Pyramid Texts focuses on identifying the different names of the boats with determinatives and shows that they are not all to be classed as solar boats.

Spells command a boat to be brought, and the deceased must name the different parts of the hull and compare them to godly images, such as the "ribs of Nephthys," or what seems to be a rope: "Take a *n'w* snake which is with the Controller of the Two Lands and put it in her [the hull], with its head in your hand and its hinder-part in my hand, and we must pull it tight between us in its name of Pain.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 12](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=22&annotation=DTV4YIHY))


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><a class="markdown-embed-link" href="/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/egyptian-underworld-the-coffin-texts-and-mythical-geography-requiring-ship-journeys/" aria-label="Open link"><svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="svg-icon lucide-link"><path d="M10 13a5 5 0 0 0 7.54.54l3-3a5 5 0 0 0-7.07-7.07l-1.72 1.71"></path><path d="M14 11a5 5 0 0 0-7.54-.54l-3 3a5 5 0 0 0 7.07 7.07l1.71-1.71"></path></svg></a><div class="markdown-embed">




The counterpart of the ba was the ka, the eternal spirit that required the sustenance of food and drink to survive, and through which the dead person could follow the alternative path, the journey through the underworld to the abode of Osiris. From the Land of Life, the deceased set out on an epic voyage toward his ultimate destination, the Field of Offering. This mythical land, the Egyptians believed, was located close to the eastern horizon, the place of sunrise. While part of the underworld, it nevertheless held the promise of rebirth. As the ka traveled from west to east, it followed the nightly progress of the sun through the realm of darkness and shared in its daily renewal. But accomplishing the journey safely was no easy task. According to the Coffin Texts, the way was full of obstacles and fraught with dangers: gates to enter, waterways to cross, demons to placate, esoteric knowledge to master. In one example, the dead had to learn the various parts of a ship in order to win a place on the barque of the sun god. Spells provided the magical means for overcoming such hurdles, and some coffins were even decorated (on the inside, for the convenience of the deceased) with detailed maps of the underworld, charting the various seas, islands, watercourses, and settlements along the way to the Field of Offering. The lurid descriptions of what lay between death and salvation conjure up a Hieronymus Bosch vision of hell, reflecting the universal horror of death and the desperate wish for eternal life. The ancient Egyptians’ fears ranged from the all-too-familiar afflictions of thirst and starvation to the peculiar horror of an upside-down world in which they would have to walk on their heads, drink urine, and eat excrement. The Coffin Texts show the human imagination at its most fevered. ([Location 2253](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FGMZAI&location=2253))(Wilkinson 2010, p. 130)

</div></div>
