---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/free-play-freedom-and-exercise-as-children-develop-is-directly-correlated-to-ability-to-focus-and-learning-overall/"}
---

She noticed that when a DVD of the early episodes of Sesame Street from the late 1960s was released, they had put a warning on the screen at the start. Five-year-olds are shown walking the streets on their own, talking to strangers, and playing on vacant lots. The warning says: “The following is intended for adult viewing only and may not be suitable for our youngest viewers.” She realized the change was so dramatic that now it was as if kids couldn’t even be allowed to see what freedom might look like. ([Location 3770](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B093G9TS91&location=3770))

- For years, scientists have been discovering a broad body of evidence showing that when people run around—or engage in any form of exercise—their ability to pay attention improves. For example, one study that investigated this found exercise provides “an exceptional boost” to attention in children. ([Location 3781](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B093G9TS91&location=3781))

- Free play has been turned into supervised play, and so—like processed food—it has been drained of most of its value. This means that now, as a kid, Lenore said, “you’re not getting that [chance to develop these skills]—because you’re in a car being driven to a game where somebody tells you what position you’re playing, and when to catch the ball, and when it’s your time to hit, and who’s bringing the snack, and you can’t bring grapes because they have to be cut into quarters and it’s your mom’s job to do that…. That’s a very different childhood, because you haven’t experienced the give-and-take of life that’s going to prepare you for adulthood.” As ([Location 3812](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B093G9TS91&location=3812))

- The primary technology for learning is play. You learn to learn in play. And in a world where information is always changing, why do you want to fill their heads with information? We have no idea what the world will be in twenty years. Surely we want to be creating brains that are adaptable, and have the capacity to assess context, and can be thinking critically. All these things are trained through play. So it’s so misguided, it’s unbelievable.” ([Location 3827](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B093G9TS91&location=3827))