---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/general-sailing-routes-in-the-eastern-mediterranean-2nd-millennium-bce/"}
---

“If such journeys could be cumulatively plotted they would reveal the emergent lineaments of long-range routes, at least as tendencies, from out of the constant tangle of local to-and-fro movement, diversions due to weather and sheer range of options in the Aegean. The oldest trunk route ran along the Levant; another that lasted until well into the present millennium linked the Levant and Aegean via Cyprus and the coast of south Turkey. On certain long journeys reliant on consistent weather, the prevailing winds encouraged different sea-paths out and back. One example raises the issue of direct contact between Egypt and the Aegean across the open seas south of Crete. This trans-Mediterranean voyage, which figures in the Odyssey as a five-day crossing with a fair wind and necessitates travel over 200 km (125 miles) out of sight of land, demanded sterner stuff of mariners than coast hugging traffic, although the much faster, safer craft now available meant that it may have been no more dangerous or glory-gaining than feats performed in canoes throughout the Mediterranean a millennium earlier. But while a following wind was very likely heading south, the reverse was a rare prospect. This argues that Egyptian-initiated contact with the Aegean was uncommon, and that any Aegean-sponsored ventures returned by a circuitous route up the Levant and along Anatolia, ensuring that return cargos were mixed in origin. add in the fact that most Egyptian finds on Crete (and vice versa) were of types readily available at Levantine ports, and the deduction must be that the Levant, once again, frequently acted as the intermediary. Some direct contacts between Egypt and the Aegean may be likely, but are hard to verify until well into the 2nd millennium, and even then retain an exotic ‘edge-of-our-world’ quality, often fantastical or mythic, distinct from cosy connections in the Aegean or across Levantine and Cypriot seas, as well as more attenuated but fairly faithful transmission between the Aegean and both the Levant and Cyprus.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 374](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=350&annotation=T2XDSATY))
