---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/hatshepsut-directed-trade-relations-with-punt-and-boat-depictions-are-tied-to-these-trips/"}
---

“She also sponsored what seems to have been a spectacularly successful trading expedition to [[Punt\|Punt]], an African land whose location has not been conclusively determined, though it might have been in the region of Somalia. This venture was one of Hatshepsut’s proudest accomplishments. Although she didn’t go there herself, she had scenes carved on her mortuary chapel showing the various stages of the expedition. The boats, with all their rigging and cargo, were carefully depicted, as were the Puntite houses built on stilts, safe from flooding; the foreign plants and animals; and the extensive wealth obtained there.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 142](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=167&annotation=76DLUYKS))

“Hatshepsut wasn’t breaking new ground with this trading mission; Punt had been a trading partner of Egypt almost 800 years before, during the Sixth Dynasty, when a very young King Pepi II had anxiously awaited the arrival of the treasures from Punt. He had been particularly keen to see a dancing man who had been captured from a tribe of pygmies. He wrote to tell his representative on the boat coming north that the man should be treated with utmost care. As his words show, Pepi II was just a child and was not yet interested in Punt for its material wealth: “Take care lest he the pygmy dancer fall in the water! When he sleeps at night, get capable persons sleeping around him in his cabin. Inspect ten times during the night, for My Majesty desires to see this pygmy more than the produce of the mining country of Punt.”” ([Podany, 2012, p. 143](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=168&annotation=USX3URHT))