---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/hittite-king-suppiluliuma-i-becomes-more-belligerent-around-1340-bce/"}
---

“Around 1344 BCE, after Akhenaten had ruled Egypt for about nine years, a big change took place in Hatti. Tudhaliya II died and Suppiluliuma I came to the Hittite throne. Suppiluliuma was one of the great kings of Hittite history; he ruled for at least twenty-two years, and he seems to have outlived almost all his contemporaries who are known from the Amarna archive: Akhenaten and Tutankhamen in Egypt, Tushratta in Mittani, Burna-buriash II in Babylonia, and probably Ashur-uballit of Assyria.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 267](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=292&annotation=3GKB6S45))

“Suppiluliuma set out on a campaign into Mittani soon after his treaty had been formalized with Artatama, supposedly because he had been provoked by Tushratta. He had been on the throne for only four or five years, but he’d prepared for this war extensively. It’s unclear what Tushratta did to bring on this attack, since Suppiluliuma wrote that “Tushratta called for attention from the great king, King of Hatti, Hero,” that is, himself. There’s a fragmentary text mentioning that the king of Mittani attacked a country called Nuhashi, which had been allied with Hatti. The text isn’t dated, but perhaps this was the time when the attack took place. Maybe Tushratta wanted to create a buffer between his empire and that of the Hittites. In any event, Suppiluliuma felt that he had to “turn his attention,” as he put it, to Tushratta, and to “plunder the lands of the west bank of the River (Euphrates).”” ([Podany, 2012, p. 271](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=296&annotation=AQUJMU5W))