---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/in-general-the-most-elaborate-and-rigid-social-structures-of-trade-are-the-most-susceptible-to-collapse-with-old-kingdom-egypt-and-the-akkadian-dynasty-as-examples/"}
---

“In general, the most elaborate and rigid social structures of trade were most susceptible to collapse, both because the reputation of those at the top for effective organization and intercession with the gods was compromised, and because their investment in the status quo gave them less incentive to initiate change.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 349](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=325&annotation=TPQGPGL3))

==“The demise by 2150 BCE of the Akkadian hegemony in Mesopotamia, which had displayed its fragility at each royal succession, is unsurprising. . . . While Byblos survived, it lost its special relationship with the pharaohs - ‘none sail north to Byblos today’ as was bemoaned, from an Egyptian perspective, in the hazily dated *Admonitions of Ipuwer*.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 349](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=325&annotation=JNFJY7UI))==

“Regardless, the expansion’s timing and abrupt evaporation at the start of the 2nd millennium closely associates it with the climatic crunch around 2200 BCE. As this disrupted neighbouring societies and hubs of trade, a sudden window of opportunity opened for the seafarers based in between, in a region largely impervious to drought. Looking far into the future, it is decidedly thought-provoking that the next time Adriatic seafarers broke out into the wider Mediterranean would also be the next time that Aegean societies imploded, 1000 years later, at the end of the Bronze Age.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 352](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=328&annotation=4JBP7GCS))

### The Sea Peoples

By now, the pharaoh’s advisers were well acquainted with the enemy. “The foreign countries plotted together in their islands.… Their league comprised Peleset, Tjeker, Shekelesh, Denyen, and Weshesh.”9 Though the names might be strange, the phenomenon was all too familiar. The dreaded Sea Peoples had returned. Thirty years earlier, a different coalition of Aegean and Anatolian peoples had conspired with the Libyans in an attempted invasion of Egypt in the reign of Merenptah. Now new bands had joined together in common cause, sweeping aside all before them. Driven from their homelands (unknown, but possibly the western Mediterranean or Anatolia) by drought, famine, and the desire for a better life, and possessed of a fierce and warlike nature, the Sea Peoples had proved an unstoppable force as they moved steadily southward and eastward, along the Aegean and Mediterranean coasts of Asia Minor, and down the coast of the Near East toward the Sinai and the Nile delta. Alongside battalions of well-armed (and armored) soldiers came women and children in ox-drawn carts, carrying their meager possessions with them. This was a mass migration by desperate and determined people. So far, no city or state had been able to resist. Egypt knew it faced a battle for survival. ([Location 5396](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FGMZAI&location=5396))(Wilkinson 2010, p. 329)