---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/in-the-2nd-millennium-bce-the-aegean-began-interacting-more-directly-with-the-tyrrhenian-sea/"}
---

“As Sardinia demonstrates, most landscapes west of the Aegean remained far more sparsely occupied than those in the east. Signs of human intervention were more limited, and separated by extensive wilderness. The consolidating patchworks of olive groves and vineyards characteristic of the cash-cropping east find no parallel, nor do the latter’s agricultural terraces. As before, there are only a few, largely unconfirmed hints of olive and vine cultivation, and analogues for the east’s efficient apparatus for extracting, refining, storing and transporting the resultant liquids are conspicuously absent. The only late exception, as we shall see, is southeast Italy, a region in close touch with the Aegean.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 416](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=392&annotation=48RZ3SXD))

“The Aegean adopted sailing ships early in the 2nd millennium BCE and within a few centuries these began to probe the Tyrrhenian. But local adoption in the central and west Mediterranean came substantially later. Just how much later is a matter of guesswork, but from Italy to Iberia the first images date to the transition from Bronze to Iron Age. Early in the millennium incised canoes decorated a pot on Filicudi in the Aeolian islands, and as late as the 14th century BCE a sail-less longboat was depicted at Thapsos in Sicily, a well-connected coastal site to which we shall return. Although ostensibly a swiftly roving sailing ship should have been its own best advocate, there were clearly long delays in uptake, presumably due to the investment needed for their construction, the learning curves involved in building and handling, and probably (as earlier in the Aegean) the resistance of canoe-focused groups. Until at least 1300 BCE, the speed and transport capabilities associated with sailing ships were a prerogative of eastern interlopers. The 2nd-millennium BCE east Mediterranean is commonly portrayed as a vast expanse compared to a more parochial west, but the latter’s seas, by geographical measures alone more open in several sectors than those further east, in fact remained more awe-inspiring for people travelling across their distances than the shrunken frog-ponds that the sail had created off the Nile, Levant, Cyprus and coastal Aegean.” (Broodbank, 2013, p. 416-17) (pdf)