---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/in-the-2nd-millenium-bce-crete-fit-into-a-vast-cultural-superstructure-unique-to-the-bronze-age/"}
---

Yet Crete in the second millennium B.C., along with the rest of the Aegean under its influence, was an integral part of the Middle East in a way that Greece never would be, not even in the so-called Oriental period or in the heady days of Hellenistic influence in the east. All the Middle Eastern civilizations of this period, despite some clashes, stood on an equal footing, with open access from one to another. There was no imbalance: trade went in both directions, with mutual exchange. Across the whole area covered by these trading links, there existed a curious kind of community, a vast cultural superstructure, connecting the various regions. W. S. Smith is right to see this as the essential feature of the Bronze Age. The operative unit was the Middle Eastern region as a whole, rather than any single sector, not even Crete at the height of its brilliance or Egypt in the Eighteenth Dynasty. And indeed, if one were to look for the most dynamic element in this cultural blossoming, one would probably choose the Ugarit-Byblos axis in Syria. As a long-established hub of communications, it lay at the heart of this unified area, this confluence of contacts: from Knossos to Susa and from Mycenae to Elephantine, the history of Middle Eastern civilization in its fully developed state is therefore really a single story. ([Location 2672](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2672))(Braudel 2001, 127)