---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/khufu-s-pyramid-at-giza-also-has-rock-cut-boats-besides-the-famous-disassembled-boat-pits/"}
---

“Three rock-cut boats are known from the Khufu pyramid complex and two from between two subsidiary pyramids nearby. Like the pits on the south side of the pyramid, the stone boats are hewn out of the limestone of the plateau. The presence and shape of wood fragments in the bottom of the rock-cut boats suggest that they once held complete wooden vessels (Figs. 32-34). ==Steps leading into one of the hulls and the breadth of Khufu's rock-cut boats indicate that they were open to the sky but below ground level.==” ([Ward, 2000, p. 80](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=88&annotation=AEQNKDIY))

“Zahi Hawass has studied the boats in the Khufu complex. He believes that Khufu Boats 3 and 4, on a north-south axis parallel to the east side of the pyramid on each side of the funerary temple, were the mil-boat and the bark of Horus, the sky god, for taking the king to the horizon of Re. Khufu I and II from south of the pyramid are seen as *msktt* (night) and *m'nd_t* (day) solar boats. The east-west boat north of the causeway is viewed as the funerary boat for transporting the mummy to Giza, or as possibly connected with the cult of Hathor, wife of the sun god Re and mother to the king.

Hawass is correct, the Khufu boats offer a very different perspective on the creation of rock-cut boats and the burial of hull than that provided for the Khafra, Unas, Kagemni, Dynasty 6, and Ne-user-re boat . It i difficult, however, to link the single or paired examples of demonstrably solar boats and the large groups of Khufu and Khafra. Khufu I is most similar to Khafra's Boat 1; Khufu II and Khafra Boat 3 may also be closely related. Khufu Boat and Khafra Boat 4 may also represent the same boat type, if the rounded cut-outs in Khufu were for stringers above the sheer strake.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 81](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=89&annotation=QIPWT8HG))