---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/king-tut-and-the-end-of-the-amarna-period-and-shift-from-egyptian-cosmopolitanism-late-bronze-age-collapse-begins/"}
---

“Tutankhaten wasn’t old enough to rule alone when he took the throne in 1336 BCE, and his advisors weren’t at all enamored of the changes that had taken place in Akhenaten’s reign. Within a couple of years they had convinced Tutankhaten to change his name. His original name honored the god Aten, Akhenaten’s god, but Amen was the state god once again, so the king became Tutankhamen. His wife went from being Ankhesenpaaten to Ankhesenamen. The advisors also convinced the young king to move the capital city back to Thebes and to abandon Amarna, which he did very quickly; none of the letters in [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/The Amarna Letters\|the Amarna letters]]/archive was written after his first or second year. The advisors to Tutankhamen also seem to have been anxious to win back the lands that had been lost to Suppiluliuma. They began to prepare for a campaign against Kadesh and the Hittites.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 282](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=307&annotation=9G2LSIZY))

“The apparent calm of nine years didn’t last. Starting in 1327 BCE, a series of events changed the map of the Near East and nearly created an empire larger than any that had existed before. Tutankhamen, now in his late teens, might have been moving towards becoming a new Thutmose III, active in campaigns, perhaps, and ready to rebuild Egyptian power in the Levant. He sent troops to Kadesh to attempt to bring it back within Egyptian control. Mursili II, Suppiluliuma’s son, wrote concerning this time that “Egyptian troops and chariots came to the land of Kinza, which my father had conquered, and attacked the land of Kinza (Kadesh).”” ([Podany, 2012, p. 283](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=308&annotation=PDAH2QHE))

“So here was almost the whole Near East poised on the brink of a major war, Hatti against Mittani and Egypt against Hatti. And Assyria was flexing its muscles as well, doubtless interested in capturing some of Mittani’s lands if that state collapsed. Although Tushratta didn’t personally lead the Mittanian forces in Syria, he was apparently still alive in Mittani. Artatama II (the pre- tender to the Mittani throne) was allied with Suppiluliuma and waiting for his chance to be king. Suppiluliuma, having defeated the Hurrians, was getting ready to besiege Carchemish.  

But right at this crucial moment, the young pharaoh Tutankhamen died. Mursili II of Hatti picks up the story: “When the people of Egypt heard of the attack on Amka, they were afraid. And since their lord Nibhururiya (Tutankhamen) had just died, the Queen of Egypt who was the king’s wife sent a messenger to my father.” The boy king had not even reached his twenties. Recent studies of his mummy show that he wasn’t murdered; he probably died of natural causes—perhaps he caught the flu, or suffered from an infection when he broke his leg.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 284](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=309&annotation=X6YHGHMT))