---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/lack-of-resources-wood-in-particular-in-egypt-and-mesopotamia-led-to-the-expansion-of-trade-networks/"}
---

#### Broodbank

“The alluvium’s lack of metals, stones and wood drove Ubaid communities to look to their peripheries, much as did the inhabitants of the plains of Thessaly and the Tavoliere, but on a larger scale and with the critical distinction that their outlying networks engaged radically different ecologies, whose combined contribution further fired up the emergent properties at the centre. To the south, the shallow, subtropical Persian Gulf thrust 200 km (125 miles) inland from its current marshy limit (after having been almost entirely dry at the Last Glacial Maximum), and we can assume inspiring oral versions of the flood legends later committed to writing. Finds of Ubaid pots all the way down the Gulf, together with lumps of barnacle-covered, reed-impressed bitumen coating, are all that survive of a vigorous sea trade in reed boats for Omani copper and maybe dates. In the north, contact was established with metalworkers in highland southeast Anatolia as well as north Levantine groups with access both to metals in the Taurus and (as we shall learn) copper from the southern Levant. These routes acted in reverse as conduits for the outward transmission of Mesopotamian innovations.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 239](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=225&annotation=NMJWKBPI))

#### Braudel

These urban societies had certain immediate needs: salt, wood for building, stone (even the most basic). Then, like any society which is developing towards a more sophisticated stage, new needs sprang up and quickly became necessities: gold, silver, copper, tin (essential for casting bronze), oil, wine, precious stones, ivory, rare woods. As it grew richer, a society would send abroad for these goods. In short, the range of commodities to be traded increased considerably, opening up to outside influence economic circuits which would otherwise have been self-contained. Road traffic became organized: caravans of pack-asses soon appeared, to be followed by wheeled vehicles (the heavy four-wheeled cart was not easy to manoeuvre, but was present in Mesopotamia by the fourth millennium), and cargo vessels, powered by sails or oars. ([Location 1205](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=1205)) (Braudel 2001, p. 48)

The essential role played by wood in the Egyptian and Mesopotamian economy is hardly surprising. Most obviously, it was simply used every day as an all-purpose material, as in the rest of the world, including Europe, until the nineteenth century and beyond. But the problem was that the alluvial soil of both areas, despite all its advantages, could not produce this essential material. One Assyriologist says that the useful tree species in Mesopotamia can be counted on the fingers of one hand. ([Location 1403](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=1403)) (Braudel 2001, p. 59)