---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/maritime-mobility-was-a-major-medium-for-the-spread-of-neolithic-farming/"}
---

“For whatever the social and economic processes involved in the spread of farming, there is no doubt that maritime mobility was a major medium for its dissemination. The marine short-cuts of Mediterranean geography and the sea’s wider connecting potential began to come more fully into play, and to demolish the barriers to contact between opposing shores, sub-basins and islands. The Neolithic expanded from the east to west Aegean, across the Adriatic and via the Tyrrhenian Sea to the Atlantic. The big islands figured prominently, from 9th-millennium BCE Cyprus, to (as we will see) Crete, Sicily, Corsica and Sardinia, all of whose place in the flow of the Neolithic stream is proven by their earliest dates for sheep and goat (two convenient proxies), which fully kept pace with the adjacent mainlands. The fact that overland expansion in temperate Europe, and in particular 6th-millennium BCE ‘Linearbandkeramik’ dispersal from Hungary to the Paris basin, could be equally rapid underscores the point that the advantage of Mediterranean maritime movement was not yet speed, but directness and accessibility.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 187](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=174&annotation=RK2F5WW2))

“This provokes two further observations. First, ==if much transmission was by sea, we will have lost a disproportionate number of early farming sites to the last millennia of sea level rise, for low coastal shelves are likely to have been as attractive to farmers as to hunter-gatherers.== At Franchthi, the cave was used from early in the Neolithic as a peripheral activity area for a now partially drowned open settlement, while at Feucate in southwest France an inundated Neolithic settlement was found during the dredging of the lagoon. Second, the Mediterranean Neolithic’s spread represents the fusion of two initially separate developments: maritime hunter-gatherer seafaring and terrestrial farming, first in the context of Cyprus and then repeated all over the basin. The rapidity and success with which these were combined must have varied, speeding or retarding events in different theatres. Moreover, the local players cannot be reduced to a simple dichotomy between hunter-gatherer seafarers playing ferryman to landlubber farmers.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 187](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=174&annotation=WLY76F5L))