---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/mentions-of-ahhiawa-in-the-amarna-letters-may-in-fact-be-tied-to-the-mycenaeans/"}
---

“The Hittite kings mentioned many minor kingdoms in their records; western Anatolia was littered with them. One of these kingdoms has intrigued scholars for decades: it was called Ahhiya or Ahhiyawa, and it showed up in a few Hittite records from the early fourteenth to the late thirteenth century. It seems that it wasn’t within Anatolia; one had to go by sea to get there. Sometimes the Ahhiyawan leaders were allied with the Hittites; at other times they were helping with rebellions against the Hittites. Their history is impossibly spotty; it has been pulled together from fragmentary references in just a couple of dozen texts. But that name—Ahhiyawa. To the people who first deciphered Hittite texts, it looked a little like Achaea, one of the ancient names for Greece, and it still does. In fact, most scholars now think that Ahhiyawa was Greek.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 261](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=286&annotation=LZC93ETC))

“It wasn’t a great power, not on the scale of Hatti, Babylonia, Assyria, or Egypt, but it played an important role in the politics and economics of the eastern Mediterranean region. Ahhiyawa seems even to have participated in the usual gift exchanges. One letter to Hattusili III mentioned “the gift of the king of Ahhiyawa.” If it turns out that the Greeks were participants in the diplomatic system and some cuneiform letters are eventually found at one of the palaces in Mycenaean Greece, or if a letter from an Ahhiyawan king is found in Egypt or one of the other great powers, then we’ll know much more. For now, Ahhiyawa is an intriguing side note to the story of the brotherhood of great kings.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 262](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=287&annotation=JECGXHKZ))