---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/mesopotamia-s-preference-for-trade-in-silver-south-east-vs-trade-in-raw-goods-north-west/"}
---

#USE in [[Maritime History Podcast/01 Episode Transcripts/Series 1 - The Bronze Age/(OLD) 002 - Surplus Food, Big Buildings, and Power Hungry Lugals\|(OLD) 002 - Surplus Food, Big Buildings, and Power Hungry Lugals]] OR [[Maritime History Podcast/01 Episode Transcripts/Series 1 - The Bronze Age/(OLD) 003 - Sargon to Hammurabi - Trade and Turmoil in Ancient Mesopotamia\|(OLD) 003 - Sargon to Hammurabi - Trade and Turmoil in Ancient Mesopotamia]] OR [[004\|004]]

In Babylon, there were even banking houses, so we are not surprised to find a monetary economy in Ugarit, the outlet on the coast for the Mesopotamian hinterland: it was an active port (150 vessels are mentioned as being there) and not far from the Taurus silver mines. The city’s merchants, importers and exporters, some of them foreign in origin, paid for their purchases of wool, slaves and even land in silver sicles. Did the choice of silver, as a less cumbersome form of payment than copper or bronze, promote Mesopotamia’s foreign trade? One would think so. But silver itself had to be purchased. In return for imported raw materials and foodstuffs—silver, timber, copper, tin, precious and semi-precious stones, oil and wine—Mesopotamia could offer only barley, dates, hides, woollen fabrics, engraved cylinders and other craft goods. It also acted as an intermediary, taking a commission for its services. The rule seemed to be to buy as much as possible from the south and east, where silver was highly valued (so southern Mesopotamia preferred to buy copper from Bahrain rather than from Anatolia) and to sell luxury goods and textiles to the north and west, the suppliers of silver. Perhaps the Mesopotamian economy did not operate entirely on the standard rule for advanced countries—buying raw materials and making a profit by selling them on, either in original condition or as manufactured products. It could be that Mesopotamia was already benefiting from the rule which prevailed so long in the Mediterranean, whereby the use of silver, an over-valued commodity in the Far East, was an advantage in itself, a beneficial “multiplier” of trade, at least for return goods. In that case, the choice of silver currency in Mesopotamia, close to the currents of trade with India, would carry extra significance. But the explanation is based on rather slight evidence. ([Location 2169](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2169)) (Braudel 2001, p. 101) 