---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/mycenaean-relationship-with-egypt-and-the-hittite-empire/"}
---

“The Egyptian kings knew a lot about Greece. Amenhotep III listed Aegean place names on a statue, almost as though they were subject to him, which they weren’t. It’s possible that the list instead records the travels of Egyptian ambassadors who had been sent by the pharaoh perhaps to pursue trade relationships with the various Mycenaean cities. Amenhotep III seems to have seen the Aegean as part of his world, right alongside his vassal states, the lands of the other great kings, and the African kingdoms with which he traded.  

Few Mycenaean pots have been found in Hatti, but the Hittites had a powerful impact on Mycenaean defensive architecture. The similarities are so striking that it is almost as though Hittite advisors had shown up with plans and engineers to help the Greeks design their fortification walls and city gates. So why wasn’t the king of Mycenaean Greece a participant in the diplomatic network of [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/The Amarna Letters\|the Amarna letters]]? It’s puzzling. Of course, there’s only one letter from the king of the Hittites in the archive, and he was definitely a great king. There were certainly more, but they’ve been lost. Maybe Mycenaean letters existed too, but weren’t brought to Amarna when Akhenaten moved the capital city; or maybe they weren’t found by the peasants who uncovered most of the letters, and are still in the ground somewhere; or maybe they were among the group of cuneiform letters from Amarna that were broken and lost soon after their discovery. Back in the reign of Thutmose III, before the brotherhood of great kings had formed, a delegate from Tanaja had sent gifts to the pharaoh. This was almost certainly in Greece. Perhaps they continued to do so.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 260](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=285&annotation=FD5DPGVU))

“We tend to think of Greece as always having been important because, in its later incarnation, it played such a starring role in the development of civilization in the west. It’s surprising to realize that the great kings of Egypt, Mittani, Babylonia, and Hatti would never have guessed that their own lan- guages would be lost for centuries while that of the Mycenaeans would never be forgotten, nor that the descendants of the warlike inhabitants of a land at the edge of their world would create such a brilliant civilization as that of Classical Greece.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 261](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=286&annotation=LR7Z2P8H))