---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/nag-el-hamdulab-dated-to-circa-3200-bce/"}
---

==Nag el-Hamdolab discovered in 1800, but not "rediscovered" until 2008==

“The form of the boat and the important parallels between the Nag el-Hamdulab tableaux and the Scorpion and Narmer documents suggest that a late Dynasty 0 date, c. 3200–3100 BC, is most probable for the Nag el-Hamdulab tableaux, placing the ensemble at a highly important moment in the process of state formation in Egypt.” ([Hendrickx et al., 2012, pp. 1,074](zotero://select/library/items/EWJ5D5I4)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/U49CD5KL?page=7&annotation=98ZQA85U))

“The uniformity in style and the interrelations between the sites and tableaux suggest that the Nag el-Hamdulab cycle of images is the result of a premeditated ‘grand scheme,’ rather than the consequence of artists adding scene upon scene over time.” ([Hendrickx et al., 2012, pp. 1,074](zotero://select/library/items/EWJ5D5I4)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/U49CD5KL?page=7&annotation=BJFXH55Y))

“All in all, there can be no doubt that the Nag el-Hamdulab tableaux predate the Scorpion mace head and the Narmer monuments. Defining a terminus post quem is more difficult. The boats indicate a chronological position definitely after Naqada IIC because of the differences with the boats on decorated pottery. Comparison with the knife-handle fragment from tomb U-127 — dating to Naqada IID — and the presence of writing at least during Naqada IIIA1 allow a date for the Hamdulab tableaux already at the very beginning of the Naqada III period. However, for that period representations of a ruler wearing a recognizable crown of pharaonic pedigree (as opposed to the “derby”-like hat of the Gebelein Linen ruler and the “bald” head of the Scorpion Tableau conqueror) are not yet known. Remarkably, not even from tomb U-j at Abydos, where the royal crook was physically interred, neither for the kings of Dynasty 0 before Narmer, is a developed crown of pharaonic iconography present. Considering the important parallels between the Hamdulab tableaux and the Scorpion and Narmer documents, a late Dynasty 0 or very early First Dynasty date for the Hamdulab Cycle is most probable.” ([Hendrickx et al., 2010, p. 313](zotero://select/library/items/W5LVBCFI)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/BX62EGKH?page=19&annotation=N2YPAB2Z))