---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/naukratis-in-the-nile-delta-is-the-pristine-example-of-a-trade-emporion/"}
---

“The most remarkable emporion of all, however, lay on another navigable river far to the southeast. It went under the evocative name of ‘Rule over Ships’, Pi-emroye in Egyptian, or in its better known Greek form, [[Naukratis\|Naukratis]].” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 553](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=519&annotation=WEKP4J8Q))

“The pharaoh Necho sought to neutralize the overland camel trail between the Levant and Arabia by initiating a canal between the Mediterranean and the Red Sea via the Nile (a variant of the modern Suez Canal whose very conception starkly illustrates the different labour pools available to Egypt and Corinth). He reputedly also sponsored a Phoenician expedition to circumnavigate Africa, which would have bitten off vastly more than anticipated and whose reality is debatable.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 554](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=520&annotation=QDYJIRKT))

“[[Naukratis\|Naukratis]], as a gateway the equivalent to late imperial China’s Shanghai, imposed similar movement restrictions on the Aegean merchants who followed in the mercenaries’ wake.

“Naukratis was set up with pharaonic assent some 60 km (35 miles) from the then coast, on the Canopic branch. A canal connected it to Sais, a convenient but safe 15 km (10 miles) away, and along this an Egyptian functionary with the sonorously antiquated title of Overseer of the Gate to the Foreign Lands of the Great Green conveyed the customs levied there back to the capital. The earliest pottery suggests a start around 620 BCE, primarily involving Samians, Milesians and Aeginetans, but other east Aegean city-states quickly joined in, as did some Cypriot merchants, and a sizeable Egyptian quarter and storage facility arose alongside the Greek shrines and other structures. In a stark sign of the times, east Phoenician traders were conspicuous by their absence – a last Tyrian enclave, at Memphis, fizzled out within a decade of the foundation of Naukratis, which became the sole legitimate destination for foreign ships entering the Nile. The highly profitable backbone of the trade was Aegean silver, wine and oil for Egyptian gold, grain, linen and papyrus, but much else rode on this, including locally churned out faience for the insatiable Mediterranean market in small Egyptianizing goods, and high-class international whores for the rich merchants passing through. As a place where Greeks from many city-states lived cheek by jowl with each other and Egyptian neighbours who, at least in their official manifestation, remained resolutely different and past masters in categorizing others, Naukratis became a veritable forge for Greek identity. In addition to the individual shrines built by participating city-states, nine clubbed together to erect a structure known as the ‘Hellenion’, one of the first allusions to this embracing term for a broader sense of Greekness. From emporic origins, Naukratis evolved over time into in effect a landless, partly pan-Hellenic city-state. As ever, the Nile Delta proved to be a fertile hotbed for surprising new ways of combining things around the Mediterranean.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 555](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=521&annotation=JR238Q4M))