---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/obsidian-studies-show-that-trade-is-perhaps-an-overstatement-for-the-mesolithic-mediterranean-since-movement-of-goods-was-local/"}
---

“People on islands prompt us to ask how much real seafaring, as opposed to just strand-line activity, was going on in the Mesolithic sphere. The attractive concept has recently been proposed of early Holocene ‘foraging seascapes’ in the Mediterranean, but how widely does it apply? In the Aegean, and earlier in the seas around Cyprus, it resonates well with the visible tip of the iceberg, though even here most food was still taken on land. Further west, however, it is worth enquiring to what extent the iceberg actually existed. Of course, the presence of people on Corsica and Sardinia proves seafaring, and a further hint comes from Dalmatia. Here, most islands with Mesolithic finds were still joined to the mainland or so close as to make no odds. But one find from Vela Spilja is more telling: a pestle made from an igneous pebble whose source is one of several volcanic islets already well out to sea by this time. The prime candidate is mid-Adriatic Palagruza, whose tiny size belies its significance as a maritime stopover (and also a source of fine chert on its satellite, Mala Palagruza), and from which comes a reciprocally suggestive possibly Mesolithic shell bead. This pebble aside, however, central Mediterranean island stones reveal a very different picture from the east. Most remarkably, there was virtually no use of obsidian - just one potentially secure find apiece from Sicily and Apulia, a dubious candidate from Liguria and a few of unknown origin from northwest Greece and Albania. In the case of the [[Lipari\|Lipari]] source, part of the explanation is that the main flow quarried in antiquity was only created during a volcanic eruption in the 9th millennium BCE (most of what is visible today was formed in medieval times). Possibly the minor sources on remote Palmarola and Pantelleria had not yet been discovered (itself good negative evidence), while the total absence of obsidian from Sardinian sources in the interior furnishes additional proof of the coastal orientation of the island’s hunter-gatherers. Further west, we lose both the convenient tracer of obsidian sources and easily accessible islands, but on the basis of what we do see, there is no sign of sea crossings between the 12th-millennium BCE Iberian harpoon at Taforalt in the western Maghreb, and the start of the Neolithic. Despite the time-honoured penchant for seafood in the west and central Mediterranean, a tentative case might be made that true hunter-gatherer seafaring was rarer than in the east, especially in regions less endowed with indented coasts and islands. Any such distinction would, of course, have ramifications for understanding the subsequent expansion of farming.” (@BroodbankmakingMiddleSea2013, p. 183-84) (pdf)

Further east, in the Aegean, Upper Palaeolithic and Mesolithic seafarers made their way occasionally along the island chain of the Cyclades to Melos, collecting its obsidian and transporting it back to cave sites on the Greek mainland such as the cave at Franchthi, 120 kilometres from Melos; their boats were probably manufactured from reeds, which could be shaped and cut using the small sharp-edged stones, or microliths, that they had developed. Since sea levels were still rising, the distance between islands was shorter than now. Mesolithic Sicily also knew obsidian, which was obtained from the volcanic Lipari islands off Sicily’s north-east shore. Movement across the open sea had begun. It was local; it was spasmodic; but it was deliberate: the aim was to collect precious materials in order to make superior tools. This was not ‘trade’; there was probably no one living permanently on either Melos or Lipari, and even had there been, the settlers would not have expressed a proprietary right to the volcanic glass that lay about the islands. Those on Sicily or in Greece who acquired pieces of obsidian did not manufacture blades in order to send them inland to neighbouring communities. Autarky was the rule. (AbulafiaGreatSeaHuman2013)([Location 493](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B00551S1HI&location=493))(page 7)