---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/odysseus-route-to-egypt-is-evidence-that-minoans-likely-sailed-outside-view-of-land/"}
---

General histories have argued for too long that navigation on the high seas out of sight of land, in particular the Rhodes-Egypt crossing, cannot have been undertaken until about the third century B.C., in the Hellenistic period. It must surely be accepted now that this major feat—and it certainly was one—had been accomplished earlier. The modest sailing ships of Minos had been the bold pioneers. A late piece of evidence, but all the same earlier than the Hellenistic period, unequivocally supports this view. Odysseus, arriving home in Ithaca disguised as a Cretan merchant, is described as saying: “I proposed to go on a voyage to Egypt. I equipped nine ships and men flocked to them. For six days, these brave people feasted with me. On the seventh we set sail, and from the plains of Crete a fair and full north wind took us straight there, as if on the current of a river. We had only to sit and let the wind and our pilots take us. In five days we had reached the fine river Egyptos.” We might note that this feat would not be surpassed even many centuries later, in the days of Barbarossa and the Turks. The north wind was the secret responsible for these performances. One had to have the courage to trust to it—but the rewards made it worth while: Egypt was a land of gold and treasure. ([Location 2464](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2464))(Braudel 2001, 116)