---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/parallels-between-egypt-s-divine-henu-barque-and-predynastic-rock-art/"}
---

#### Huyge 2002

“Rare iconographic parallels, particularly on ceramics from the early Dynastic temple precinct at Abydos (see Petrie 1903), suggest that the Type VII boats are sacred vessels and therefore not primarily funerary in nature. Certain details, such as the pendant banner-like ornamentation of the stern or prow (possibly a prototype of the later solar 'mat’, see Thomas 1959), suggest that they may actually be solar barques. Their conceivable solar character is moreover corroborated by the internal characteristics of the drawings: nor only are these boats almost exclusively oriented eastward (the heavenly direction where the sun rises), they are also mainly lateralised to the left. On this basis it can be suggested that these boats are propitiously related tot he sun (their preferential lateralisation is consistent with the apparent sense of rotation of the sun). By analogy with the giraffes, they may therefore be considered symbolic bearers of the sun.” ([Huyge, 2002, p. 11](zotero://select/library/items/CGK3ASIT)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/B2GXX254?page=11&annotation=NBL2FDHT))

“In my opinion, boats, human figures and ibexes alike can most adequately be explained in terms of regeneration symbolism. This seems particularly likely for the boats of Type I. On the basis of strong morphological resemblance (e.g., the occurrence of upturned ‘clubbed’ ends), these vehicles are closely related to the basic design of the divine barque (Henu-barque) of the Memphite mortuary god Sokar. The latter funerary boat, one of the earliest-known and most characteristic of its type, is also provided with solar connotations. Sokar, being a god who ‘resides in death and possesses in potency rejuvenating life’, is equated in certain passages with the rising sun. It is therefore reasonable to assume that Sokar’s Henu-barque and, by extrapolation, the Type I boats can be equated with the ascending sun-ship. A funerary vessel, which at the same time supports the rising sun-disk, must evidently be considered a symbol of regeneration. The human figures with raised arms that often accompany these boats, and are also seen in the rock art, can be explained in similar terms; their distinctive arm-pose may moreover be interpreted as sun-bearing posture. Likewise, the status of the ibex (and its often hypertrophically executed horns in particular) as a symbol of renewal and rejuvenation is generally acknowledged.” ([Huyge, 2002, p. 11](zotero://select/library/items/CGK3ASIT)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/B2GXX254?page=11&annotation=WW75APGF))

“Clear-cut ideological and solar motifs are unusual in the rock art of Horizons IV and V. In all probability, the main motivations are funerary concerns and sacrificial practices. Figured prominently among the drawings of these horizons are the sickle-shaped boats of Types XVI and XXII-XXIII, which in most cases can be related to funerary symbolism. Representatives of these vessel types may allude to funerary journeys, either the actual or mythical crossing of the Nile to the place of interment on the west bank or the ‘mystical’ nautical pilgrimage of the soul to a major sacred locus like Abydos. The predominant westward orientation of these boats, contrasting sharply with the orientation of the earlier vessel images, is a firm argument favoring this interpretation.“ ([Huyge, 2002, p. 12](zotero://select/library/items/CGK3ASIT)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/B2GXX254?page=12&annotation=4HCUCFTM))

“*The Middle and Late Predynastic: Cosmology* – The common characteristic of Horizons I and II is that the majority of rock art representations can be related to cosmological (solar) symbolism. Giraffes in Horizon I and spatial compositions with asses and Type VII boats in Horizon II are the central features. As far as their meaning and function are concerned, giraffes and boats are interchangeable; both apparently perform the vitally important task of sub-bearer.” ([Huyge, 2002, p. 12](zotero://select/library/items/CGK3ASIT)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/B2GXX254?page=12&annotation=SVFXC4G6))

“The symbolism sustained by the Type I boats, human figures with raised arms, and ibexes is evidently grafted firmly onto the fundamental ancient Egyptian concept of regeneration. The probable derivation of the Henu-barque of the mortuary god Sokar (equated with the ascending sun-ship) from the Type I boats can be a major argument from this thesis. Cosmology hides just around the corner: the daily rise of the sun (or the ascending solar barque) is by symbolic extension also the rebirth of the deceased. The sun’s fate is therefore closely connected to that of all mortals; sunrise and regeneration are basically one and the same. The solar component in Horizon II (implying the idea of rebirth) can only be separated artificially from the funerary aspect (making the concept of rebirth explicit): both meanings and their underlying motivations are intimately interwoven.” ([Huyge, 2002, p. 13](zotero://select/library/items/CGK3ASIT)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/B2GXX254?page=13&annotation=86GSULG6))

#### Lankester 2013

“Some writers have interpreted the predynastic rock-art as part of the cosmology of religion. Pavel Červiček (1993) placed the origin of the solar ‘depet’ and ‘weja’ barques, in which the god Ra crossed the sky and into the otherworld, in the rock-art boat depictions. Moreover, he claimed that the barque, “with incurved stem and stern paralleled on the Naqada D-Ware anticipates another solar barque”-the barque of Sokar illustrated on the Fifth Dynasty Palermo Stone (Červiček, 1993a: 44). This interpretation seems problematic as the latter source dates from more than a thousand years after the majority of the Central Eastern Desert petroglyphs’ creation, and any supposed similarity is likely to be influenced by a retrospective perspective.” ([Lankester, 2013, p. 268](zotero://select/library/items/NRXZZPXB)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/NZ87JA9C?page=300&annotation=DMTFAD5R))