---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/phoenician-connections-with-iberia-can-be-seen-as-early-as-the-9th-century-bce/"}
---

“Until very recently, the first solid evidence clustered in the 8th century BCE, which was indeed a boom time for Phoenician connections (see Chapter 10). But the new finds at Huelva decisively breach this barrier, demonstrating substantial, structured contacts at least a century earlier. Confirmation of this new 9th-century horizon is starting to accumulate, especially concerning its later decades. Cadiz, by the 8th century already thriving at the opposite end of the gulf, was always a promising place to look, and in the last few years a deep trench under the modern city has discovered flimsy 9th-century structures and Phoenician pottery sandwiched between the sand-dunes and later housing. On the peninsula of Nora in ore-rich southern Sardinia a stele found long ago, inscribed with Phoenician writing typical of the late 9th century, alluded to the god Pumay, as well as ‘Sardinia’ (the first proof of the island’s name) and *tarshish*, a slippery term whose associations include metal refining. Trumpeting and sanctifying of a landfall betrays a marking urge on the part of early Phoenician navigators, further affirmed by the naming of Melqart’s pillars at Gibraltar. Other traces of a presence at this time also exist, in the form of Phoenician and a few closely dated Aegean pots at Sant’Imbenia in the northwest, a site to which we shall shortly return.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 489](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=456&annotation=X9M72KW6))

Clearly, the burning question is what encouraged this extraordinary surge of connectivity that, after millennia of expert seafaring, finally brought the extremities of the Mediterranean face to face? It goes without saying that it signalled the definitive arrival of sail-driven shipping in the far west (and soon beyond, for a Mediterranean-type ship graffito carved on a rock face in Atlantic Galicia, and another recently identified on a potsherd from the Scilly Isles, off western Cornwall, fall within the same time span). same time span). But there is no indication of breakthroughs in nautical technology or navigation since those of the late 2nd millennium BCE. Pre-existing techniques brought the ends of the basin together, and principally latitude sailing of the kind that had already enabled seafarers to cover two-thirds of the basin to Sardinia, now extended to complete the route of the isles with a 400-km (250-mile) traverse to the Balearics, after which the mainland coasts converged on Gibraltar.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 490](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=457&annotation=INBC3YF6)) 