---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/phoenician-cities-tyre-specifically-practiced-planting-colonies-at-places-that-were-already-nodes-within-mediterranean-networks/"}
---

“Another aspect of this approach proved more immediately durable and equally influential subsequently. It entailed the implantation at a distance of affiliate enclaves or entire communities at points that had usually already arisen as de facto nodes within a given network. This practice found parallels as far back as Uruk expansion, Egypt’s recurrent interventions in the Levant and early Assur’s merchant diaspora in Anatolia, but so far it had not lain within the scope of Levantine maritime polities. A first effort around the Bay of Akko may slightly pre-date Tyrian ascendancy; it gave access to the Jezreel corridor and Galilee, but its location rendered it as vulnerable as the remaining mainland edifice. More promising was the 9th-century BCE restoration of a by now waning Kition into a vibrant town with refurbished temples (one to Astarte, another rededicated to Melqart) and strong ties of political dependency to Tyre. The overlying modern city of Larnaca takes its Greek name from sarcophagi in the orderly vaulted tombs of the Phoenician necropolis, from which come some of the earliest Phoenician inscriptions on Cyprus. Considering this island’s only recently diminished primacy in sea trade, plus earlier close ties between Cyprus and the central Levant, it is likely that Cypriot activities contributed a lot to the definition and spread of what are normally considered ‘Phoenician’ ways of doing things. Seen in this light, the regime change and urban regeneration at Kition probably reflected Tyre’s drive to assert a more strictly defined ascendancy at this vital staging post for shipping, and to exclude rivals from copper mines in the nearby polity of Tamassos, which, in another innovative move, Kition would soon purchase. Kition may have been rebranded as *Qarthadasht*, or ‘New Town’, in the 9th century, the earliest of many new or refashioned communities, several of which bore this name in one language or another, that would soon spring up around the basin in the context of expanding mercantile initiatives.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 488](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=455&annotation=RBZWI8QL))