---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/physical-description-of-nag-el-hamdulab-iconography/"}
---

“The rediscovered and newly discovered rock art sites that form the Nag el-Hamdulab ensemble are located on the rocks confining a sandy plain west of the village of Nag el-Hamdulab, on the west bank of the Nile, about 6km north of Aswan (Figure 3).” ([Hendrickx et al., 2012, pp. 1,070](zotero://select/library/items/EWJ5D5I4)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/U49CD5KL?page=3&annotation=LMPT3FGT))

==“Boats form a characteristic element of the Nag el-Hamdulab tableaux and nearly all of them are of the so-called ‘sickle shaped’ type with ‘clubbed’ ends (Figures 6–9), already occurring frequently in rock art and on pre-Dynastic ‘Decorated’ pottery (Graff 2009: 171), the latter dating to the Naqada IIC-D period, c. 3600–3300 BC, although the prows and sterns of Nag el-Hamdulab boats turn up higher.== Boats with high prows, but without the ‘clubbed’ ends, occur during the late pre-Dynastic and Early Dynastic period (Huyge 2002: 198), and the Nag el-Hamdulab boats seem to be at an intermediate position.” ([Hendrickx et al., 2012, pp. 1,073](zotero://select/library/items/EWJ5D5I4)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/U49CD5KL?page=6&annotation=3DID3Y4K))

“The scenes from site 1 introduce two essential elements of the decoration scheme at Nag el-Hamdulab—boats and military domination.” ([Hendrickx et al., 2012, pp. 1,076](zotero://select/library/items/EWJ5D5I4)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/U49CD5KL?page=9&annotation=JLREDJUP))

“The second important tableau of site 2 consists of two boats, one roughly above the other (Figure 8). Both boats have many oars and an oarsman on the stern, in contrast to most of the other Nag el-Hamdulab boats, indications already of the importance of the scene.  

The lower boat is of the regular ‘sickle shaped’ type but has as a remarkable element, a bull standard, on its prow. The upper boat has a very high prow and stern, both of which are very narrow, and a single, very low cabin on which stands a king wearing the White Crown. In front of the ruler is a standard with Wepwaout, ‘Opener of the Ways’, a canid god related to warfare and hunting. This second type of boat occurs only once more at Nag el-Hamdulab, where it carries a shrine, indicating that a divine boat is intended (see below, Figure 11).  

Therefore, the Nag el-Hamdulab cycle introduces the king as a religious concept rather than as a representation of actual military or political power.” ([Hendrickx et al., 2012, pp. 1,077](zotero://select/library/items/EWJ5D5I4)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/U49CD5KL?page=10&annotation=WZHYDT2G))

“Site 7, already seen by Sayce at the end of the nineteenth century, is the most important in size and can be considered the culmination of the concept behind the Nag el-Hamdulab cycle.” ([Hendrickx et al., 2012, pp. 1,080](zotero://select/library/items/EWJ5D5I4)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/U49CD5KL?page=13&annotation=HLA6Z2EH))

“The scene is organised around five boats, four of which are grouped in a row, slanting slightly upwards to the right, while the fifth is placed at a higher position (Figure 11). Despite the size and the importance of the boats, the focal element of the tableau is the representation of a ruler, followed by a fan-bearer and preceded by a dog and two standard-bearers, situated above the only boat with an elaborately decorated cabin. The king wears the White Crown and holds a long prototypical heqa-sceptre. Four of the five boats are of the regular ‘sickle shaped’ type. On the most elaborately drawn, not by coincidence below the king, a falcon standard can be seen, while three of the boats have a standard with bull horns. Both the falcon and the bull are royal symbols, emphasising the royal character of the boats. The fifth boat is placed rather awkwardly at the bottom of the tableau, beneath the ‘royal boat’. The prow and stern are not broad and rounded, but the prow is narrow and makes a hook while the stern ends in a straight top line. The boat has only a single domed or vaulted cabin, the decoration of which represents a door with the rolled up door curtain, identical to the false doors on Old Kingdom funerary monuments. An important number of parallel representations indicate that the cabin represents a shrine, transforming the vessel into a ‘divine boat’ and placing the tableau in a religious context.” ([Hendrickx et al., 2012, pp. 1,080](zotero://select/library/items/EWJ5D5I4)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/U49CD5KL?page=13&annotation=HU2DV9MF))

==“The whole of the tableau allows an exceptional view on the idea of a boat procession. The ritual event is under the direct supervision of the king and his retinue and the general idea is that of a display of royal power in the religious context of a boat procession.  ==
The boats and the king with his retinue face towards Elephantine, perhaps—given the site’s importance during the Early Dynastic period as border town controlling the First Cataract— the ultimate destination of the procession.” ([Hendrickx et al., 2012, pp. 1,080](zotero://select/library/items/EWJ5D5I4)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/U49CD5KL?page=13&annotation=5RJXZHPU))