---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/places-that-appear-in-the-amarna-letters-can-be-known-as-phoenicia-by-the-11th-century-bce/"}
---

“The places identified in [[Research Vault/02 Atomic Notes/The Amarna Letters\|the Amarna letters]] still flourished in the 11th century BCE, and recent excavations confirm smooth sequences at major sites, as well as smaller places like Sarepta, all of which maintained widespread connections. From now on, this quintessentially Mediterranean landscape of bustling coastal towns and narrow, river-striated agricultural hinterlands, climbing up through forests to skyscraping peaks, is conventionally known as Phoenicia. With its invocations of purple cloth, palms, skilled crafting and mythical beasts, ‘Phoenician’ is a Greek collective forged later, under different circumstances, that we force upon people who identified with their individual cities (so, Sidonians, Tyrians and suchlike), and continued to see themselves more broadly as Canaanite. Their Mediterranean-wide expansion still lay a few generations in the future but, free from Egyptian adjudication, the jockeying for advantage was already overt. Wenamun’s ship counts support other indications that Sidon had outstripped Byblos, and was the instigator of a central Levantine presence further south around the Bay of Akko. Tyre stayed a modest player until the late 11th century, as did Arwad, likewise an island town in the midst of the sea, and one that tapped its drinking water from an upwelling submarine aquifer. By way of contrast with this vein of unbroken mercantile life, to the north of Arwad, as far as Cilicia, the incidence of fiery destructions on either side of 1200 BCE was greater, even if most places recovered fairly fast. The permanent and textually high-decibel annihilation in about 1182 BCE of Ugarit, which had remained a flourishing international player and entrepôt of the metals trade throughout the 13th century, was a dramatic exception. Here, as elsewhere, however, neighbours quickly stepped in to fill the void, led by none other than Ugarit’s own former port of Ras Ibn Hani.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 449](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=416&annotation=34TXZMDW))