---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/possible-egypt-to-syria-trade-routes-in-predynastic-times/"}
---

“Helene Kantor continues to have reservations concerning a sea route connecting Egypt with northern Syria because of the lack of Mesopotamian artifacts and influence  at Byblos and sites in Palestine. We continue to have this rather romantic image of early seafarers hugging the coasts as they sail in their small ships because of their  fear of the sea. Such an image may be inaccurate. As previously mentioned, voyages were made to Cyprus as early as 8500 B.C. A considerable amount can be  learned in sailing these waters for five millennia. It is possible that trade was carried on at different levels. Local and regional trade, which was performed by  individuals, probably consisted of frequent stops at seaside villages during a voyage. Luxury goods from greater distances may have been carried in ships owned by  towns or small kingdoms. A voyage from Egypt to northern Syria would take best advantage of the prevailing currents by sailing up the coasts of Palestine, Lebanon,  and Syria. A return voyage following the same route would be more difficult because a ship must sail against the currents. Instead, a ship could make a much quicker  voyage by sailing due west from the Bay of Iskanderia along the southern coast of Turkey; after passing Cyprus, the North and Northwest winds and southeastern currents would result in a fast passage to Egypt. Such a route  would give western Deltaic sites like Buto a definite trade advantage with northern Syria. Under these conditions, we would not expect to find Mesopotamian goods at  sites like Byblos because ships stopping to trade and resupply, regardless of their origin, would be carrying mainly Egyptian goods.” ([Mark, 1998, p. 129](zotero://select/library/items/KAD9XH5N)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UV7SU7ME?page=138&annotation=XCKBVFAV))

“In contrast, we lack evidence suggesting that southern Mesopotamia was participating in direct trade outside the Persian Gulf. In regard to Egypt, we not only lack evidence for a direct route on which sailing ships carried cargoes between Egypt and southern Mesopotamia at this early period, but we lack evidence for such a route throughout antiquity and modern times.” ([Mark, 1998, p. 130](zotero://select/library/items/KAD9XH5N)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UV7SU7ME?page=139&annotation=B2NMR44A))

“The archaeological evidence also suggests that trade between Egypt and the East intensified during this period. Therefore, because  trade in the Persian Gulf continued to expand from the Jamdat Nasr period through early dynastic times, and because Egypt's trade relations with Syria and Palestine  intensified during the same period, we would expect trade between Egypt and Mesopotamia to increase. Yet, Mesopotamian influences disappear from Egypt during  the First Dynasty. If a southern route around Arabia connected these two cultures, this sudden absence of ties is at present inexplicable. Instead, the evidence strongly  suggests that trade between Egypt and northern Syria continues to grow as late as the First Dynasty. What appears to change is that the Egyptians had little interest in motifs and  finished goods from the north and were mainly interested in more basic items such as raw materials and oils. Therefore, the archaeological evidence for trade patterns  during the Predynastic period and into the First Dynasty suggests that most trade between Egypt and Mesopotamia was carried out via northern Syria and the  Mediterranean Sea as a result of an expansion of previously established trade routes in these regions.” ([Mark, 1998, p. 131](zotero://select/library/items/KAD9XH5N)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UV7SU7ME?page=140&annotation=R7N75EGF))