---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/possibility-that-tomb-100-black-boat-was-originally-normal-and-then-updated-later/"}
---

“A key element in this is the central boat, the so-called Black Boat (Fig. 4). here has been some disagreement on the course of this boat (see Case & Payne 1962; Ciałowicz 2001: 161), but as all the sickle-shaped boats seem to be heading towards the left (among other arguments, because of the presence of what seems to be a killick hanging from the prow; also present in the Black Boat for that matter), I tentatively accept that the high part is the stem. Like the other boats in the mural painting, the Black Boat also features a curved ‘palm branch’ at the prow. he purpose of this feature is unsure: it has been considered to be a proto-sail or a shade for the lookout. While it is always present in the sickle-shaped boats represented on Decorated pottery (Graf 2009: 174) and exceptionally also in the rock art (see Fig. 2), it has, to the best of my knowledge, never been identified before on a boat with one or two upright extremities. The low stern of the Black Boat perfectly matches the sterns of all the other boats in the panel. In fact, the only feature that distinguishes this boat from the other vessels is its stem (not considering its colour and the particular shape of one of the cabins amidships). Like the boat at Elkab site 56 discussed above, I believe it to be very likely that the Black Boat originally was also a ‘classical’ Naqada IIC-D sickle-shaped vessel and that it was transformed at a later date, most probably in Naqada III times, into a high-prowed ship (see Fig. 5). he reason why only this boat was altered and modernized seems evident. Because of its prominent position in the panel and because of the fact that it is different from the other boats as regards the shape of one of the cabins amidships (see also Ciałowicz 2001: 161, i g. 18,6), it is definitely the most important vessel of the flotilla. Either it ‘identifies’ the owner of the tomb and may well have been his personal ship of state or his own funerary bark or it is not a ‘private’ vessel at all, but a divine bark. he particular shape of the right cabin, resembling an early tent-shrine with a curved canopy, may be indicative of the latter (see Kemp 2006: 144-147).” ([Huyge, 2014, p. 98](zotero://select/library/items/EYPX3L9X)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/CU4GA9NI?page=7&annotation=VBM2TYHC))

“Accepting a Naqada III repainting and modernization of the original Naqada IIC composition is, I think, the only way to account for the several stylistic anomalies in the decoration of the Painted Tomb. It also explains the seemingly prochronistic presence in the mural paintings of themes that are unparalleled in Naqada IIC-D iconography and that it much better in the ideological repertoire of the Naqada III period, such as the ‘smiting of the captives’ and the ‘master of the animals’ scenes.” ([Huyge, 2014, p. 100](zotero://select/library/items/EYPX3L9X)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/CU4GA9NI?page=9&annotation=C3AWVGVD))

“they do suggest, however, that the tomb and its decoration can only be properly understood within a broader diachronic perspective and not just within the mid-Naqada II time frame within which the interment of its occupant took place. In other words, it is probably a misconception to state that ‘these representations should be regarded as existing within their own specific set of spatial and temporal conventions’ (Midant-Reynes 2000: 208). In fact, different such sets of conventions may be in operation here. ==As the rock art makes it undeniably clear, the creation of Predynastic visual evidence should be considered a ‘dynamic event’ rather than a ‘static condition’: recycling and updating may indeed be integrant part of the genesis of this imagery. Such a notion opens new and promising strategies to look at ‘old’ documents.” ([Huyge, 2014, p. 100](zotero://select/library/items/EYPX3L9X)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/CU4GA9NI?page=9&annotation=UGRRG6PE))==