---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/pre-dynastic-transmission-of-iconography-between-mesopotamia-and-egypt-gebel-el-arak-knife/"}
---

“Current thinking replaces the theory of an invasion by the dynastic race with the notion that the contact between Egypt and greater Mesopotamia essentially resulted from the overlapping of their hinterlands in the region of Syria and the Levant. While archaeological exploration has gone a long way toward illuminating our understanding of each center's relationship to its hinterland, the evidence for the impact of contact directly from center to center, without the "distortion" that results from diffusion through the cultural filter of the colonial hinterlands, is more enigmatic. This type of contact, arguably signaled through the imagery on the Gebel el-Arak knife, is far more difficult to interpret. The imagery on the knife handle is one of too few directly relevant sources. Other material clues that reflect contact between Mesopotamia and Egypt during the protoliterate phase are other objects having visual imagery, architectural features, imported items, and shared ceramic types.” (Pittman, 1996, p. 13) (pdf)

“In their greater Mesopotamian home, these motifs are known either from engraved seals or through the seals' ancient impressions and include images such as the serpo-feline, the lion-griffin, animals acting as human, the "priest/king" figure and his posture as master-of-animals, the snake twist surrounding the rosette, and animals having distinctive body patterning. Boats with high prows and the man with the rope also belong in this category.” ([Pittman, 1996, p. 14](zotero://select/library/items/9JWSTRSK)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/NK3CST2Q?page=7&annotation=PU4UGKR4))

#### cylinder Seals were key in this transmission

“The earliest evidence for contact is dated to the early Gerzean phase, at the moment defined in archaeological terms as Naqada 116. This equation is based on the presence of an imported Mesopotamian stamp seal in an Egyptian grave of that date. Cylinder seals from Mesopotamia were found in graves dated to the Nagada Ilb-d phase.” ([Pittman, 1996, p. 15](zotero://select/library/items/9JWSTRSK)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/NK3CST2Q?page=8&annotation=5WDTMRYJ))

“Several scenarios for the transmission of this idea/thing complex have been proposed; all posit that the cylinder seal was an important medium of transmission. The evidence for no single scenario is overwhelming; indeed, it is likely that more than one method was actually operating. The most parsimonious explanation is that engraved cylinder seals were imported into Egypt from greater Mesopotamia. As mentioned above, to date, a half-dozen such cylinder seals have been found in Egypt. Although all of them carry "schematic" imagery, this does not rule out the possibility that figural seals were also imported into Egypt.” ([Pittman, 1996, p. 16](zotero://select/library/items/9JWSTRSK)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/NK3CST2Q?page=9&annotation=KH23NI8E))

“He further concluded that the "contrast between Egyptian and Mesopotamian art is exactly the same as that between hieroglyphic and cuneiform writing, it is an essential difference in mentality, which may unsatisfactorily be described as the contrast between pictorial, symbolical, and abstract symbolical expression." As an example of this contrast, he argued that the composition of the strictly repetitive files of animals was an entirely non-Egyptian feature that had been derived from the continuous bands of images made when cylinder seals are impressed. Frankfort insisted that this reflected Mesopotamian influence because Egyptians never used images of animate subjects for decoration, but this was common practice in Mesopotamia, as evidenced particularly in glyptic imagery.” ([Pittman, 1996, p. 18](zotero://select/library/items/9JWSTRSK)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/NK3CST2Q?page=11&annotation=42CHCHFM))

“My purpose here is to suggest that not only Mesopotamian motifs and visual formulas but also Mesopotamian modes of thought that lay behind these expressions might have been of interest to the Egyptians.” ([Pittman, 1996, p. 19](zotero://select/library/items/9JWSTRSK)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/NK3CST2Q?page=12&annotation=SD56EVC9))

“Undoubtedly, these images were invented by the Egyptians and used because of their cultural potency and relevance. But with very few exceptions, it seems clear that they were meant to be understood as literal representations standing in close relationship to the referent that they resembled. Even the representation of standards in the funerary boat, which consists of symbolic elements, is first of all iconic: although the symbols are defined purely through convention, the standards themselves are shown as existing in the world. The symbol is not represented alone.” ([Pittman, 1996, p. 20](zotero://select/library/items/9JWSTRSK)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/NK3CST2Q?page=13&annotation=3CSMNVT5))

“In the next phase, designated Nagada Ila,b or early Gerzean, a dramatic increase in both the amount and the complexity of visual expression accompanies a change in the mode of ceramic production in Egypt. It is during this period that the initial evidence for contact with Mesopotamia is documented. The funerary pottery, designated Decorated Ware, continued to be painted with essentially the same themes of hunt and boat ritual, although its production became more standardized and the depictions more highly differentiated (fig. 3). The images continued to be iconic representations of things existing in the world.” ([Pittman, 1996, p. 21](zotero://select/library/items/9JWSTRSK)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/NK3CST2Q?page=14&annotation=K475NTY9))
