---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/provenance-and-description-of-the-gebel-el-arak-knife/"}
---

#### Pittman 1996

“There are few facts that can be directly associated with the Gebel el-Arak knife. It was purchased in Cairo for the Louvre Museum by George Benedite in 1914. Its alleged provenance is the village of Gebel el-Arak opposite Nag Hamadi Gebel elArak, in Upper Egypt. The knife is about 28 cm long and consists of a curved flint blade (18.8 cm) expertly formed by pressure flaking and an ivory handle (9.5 cm) elaborated with carved figural decoration. Its prehistoric date is firmly established through comparison of its distinctly chipped blade with virtually identical blades found in controlled burial contexts. In spite of its small size and lack of certain provenance, the Gebel el-Arak knife has since its discovery been considered by many scholars to be a major monument of predynastic Egyptian art. So eloquent a work of art is particularly welcome for a protoliterate phase in which comprehensible written texts are nonexistent. What makes it so eloquent is that, despite its undeniable Egyptian production, in its imagery we have an unequivocal and complex testimony of contact between Mesopotamia and Egypt, a fact that was immediately appreciated by Benedite.” ([Pittman, 1996, p. 10](zotero://select/library/items/9JWSTRSK)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/NK3CST2Q?page=3&annotation=QC7CN5GW))

“At the top of the obverse (fig. la) are two rows of virtually identical figures 6 engaged in hand-to-hand combat. Beneath, two ranges of boats, one a high-prowed type, the other open galleys, are separated by two rows of vanquished enemies. At the top of the reverse (fig. 1 b) is one of the most striking Mesopotamian borrowings, the image of the "priest-king" figure, familiar on works of protoliterate date from sites of late Uruk date.” ([Pittman, 1996, p. 11](zotero://select/library/items/9JWSTRSK)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/NK3CST2Q?page=4&annotation=AFM5G7SJ))

#### Josephson 2015

“The craft on the lowest register resemble in shape and rigging those painted in Hierakonpolis tomb 100, and on D-ware pottery. The fleets are shown pointed in opposite directions perhaps signifying a retreat, or indicating that they are meeting face to face. The physical similarities and garbs of the two forces suggest people living in close proximity, in this instance, we suggest Abydos and Hierakonpolis. The Louvre knife handle likely commemorates a great victory by the former. The enigmatic standing figure on the obverse wears a Mesopotamian hat and robe and is framed by two confronted lions; a scene similar to one depicted in tomb 100, differing only in the garb worn by the figures. It is unclear whom he might represent, although it is unlikely that he is Mesopotamian. The handle was either carved by a native artist familiar with Mesopotamian conventions, or a foreign artisan.11” ([Josephson and Dreyer, 2015, p. 167](zotero://select/library/items/NKSQ2DQY)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/4CVK9URP?page=3&annotation=KRAX9XBL))

#### Mark 1998

Therefore, a large part of the evidence for a  southern trade route is based on a statement given by an antiquities dealer. In fact, we do not know for certain where this knife handle was originally discovered. For  all we know the dealer gave a false location to protect his source of illicit antiquities. These carved handles are rare; the provenance for most is in doubt, and most are  engraved with motifs that have strong similarities to Mesopotamian motifs. We must then ask ourselves if it is not possible that these handles were carved by craftsmen  in the Delta and brought to Upper Egypt as spoils of war.” ([Mark, 1998, p. 76](zotero://select/library/items/KAD9XH5N)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UV7SU7ME?page=85&annotation=9IBCUQSL))