---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/reed-floats-in-egyptian-sacred-texts-may-align-with-their-practical-use-and-the-duality-symbolized-in-later-ship-iconography/"}
---

“Modern use of reed floats may provide explanations for the emphasis on duality in references to reed watercraft. Nubians at the second cataract us d a "huge wedge-shaped bundle of reeds" about four meters long, made of two conical bundles of reeds lashed together to cross the Nile. Breasted links modern reed floats to the ancient *shmwy*, from the word for "to embrace" or "armful," represented by pairs of elongated Ovals and among the oldest symbols in the *Pyramid Texts*. He cites Utterance 337a "the two *shn* of the sky are laid for Re, that he may ferry across to the horizon therewith." The dead king also traveled on the two *shn* of the sky. Breasted believes that the practical basis of the actual double reed float explained the constant duality of its determinative.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 78](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=86&annotation=29XGK28T))

“In the *Pyramid Texts*, reed floats are used for short journeys, such as from earth to heaven or across flooded celestial fields. Their construction was unsuited to the much longer journeys later Egyptians believed were made by solar boats. Once in heaven, the king met four spirits from the east, sometimes identified as divine shipwrights or sons of Horus, a god associated with the east. In Utterance 519, four young people tie reed floats together to make a solar boat, presumably for that day's use. 

The oldest *Pyramid Texts* are those of the Dynasty 5 ruler Unas. Solar identifications of Unas with Re are strong, but links with earlier rulers are not as clear. Although the solar cult declined rapidly after Unas, and Re is not mentioned in the *Pyramid Texts* of later rulers, solar boats, and the transport of reed floats in solar boats, continued to play a major role in the conception of the afterlife. Hassan suggests that because the duality of the reed float was theologically important, wooden solar boats, which did not need to be double, came to be seen as Day and Night boats, "thus retaining their duality and at the same time assigning a logical reason for it."

An emphasis on duality can be seen in the disposition of both Old and Middle Kingdom watercraft in mortuary settings. The wooden Khufu hulls seem to be a pair, and models of funerary boats often occur in pairs yet five (or more) boats also are reported. At Saqqara, the discovery of a pair of boats prompted this comment: '1n the filling on the north side of a mastaba of the Sixth Dynasty were found two solar barques, the timbers of which were fastened together with ropes." No other details, including the basis for identifying the pair as solar, are provided, and the boats are unpublished. A pair of long and narrow limestone structures with tapered ends above the mastaba of Kagemni at Saqqara was identified as a pair of solar boats (Fig. 30), and excavations beside the Dynasty 6 pyramid of Raneferef recently revealed two 3meter-long wooden boats. These examples from the late Old Kingdom point to ritualized belief in the symbolic importance of paired vessels, but without sufficient information on hull types and disposition, determining their original purpose is difficult.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 78](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=86&annotation=HCTAZ6AI))