---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/see-podany-2012-on-the-amarna-letters/"}
---

And yet, to warn us against making hasty judgements, it was the Peoples of the Sea (a name given them by the Egyptians) who were to play a leading role in the decisive crisis of the twelfth century. Their disturbances were the signal, if not the single cause, of the approaching catastrophe which brought the splendours of the Bronze Age to a close.6 And if they created panic everywhere, was that not primarily because no one was expecting them? An entire population crossing the sea was something astonishing, unheard of! Similarly, the Arab invasions in the seventh century A.D. were a total surprise: no one had anticipated an attack or a threat from that direction, from the desert which had for so many centuries seemed empty. ([Location 2871](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2871))(Braudel 2001, 137)

There followed a period of prudence, leading to the signature in 1280 of the oldest peace treaty of which the text has survived. It was the result of lengthy diplomatic negotiations and exchanges of messages. These tablets, written in Akkadian, the international lingua franca of the time, have been found in Amarna, Bogasköy and Ugarit. A postal service was maintained by the larger states from Anatolia to Egypt. An entire book could be written about this early version of diplomacy, about the exchanges of doctors, sculptors and craftsmen, about the policy of dynastic marriages between princely families so typical of the fourteenth and thirteenth centuries, and the Babylonian, Mittanian or Hittite princesses who became the guarantees for alliances and reconciliations of varying sincerity. These contacts between Egypt and the outside world were in fact linked to Egypt’s determination to expand towards Syria, beginning in military terms in the sixteenth century with the Syrian campaigns waged by the pharaohs of the Eighteenth Dynasty. The aim was to get rid of the Hyksos, who had been driven out of the Delta but were now entrenched in the Palestinian cities. Victorious and determined to remain so, Egypt was to exert a sort of protectorate, always needing reinforcement, over Mittani and the city-states of the Syrian coast. ([Location 2957](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2957))(Braudel 2001, 142)