---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/submerged-ancient-sites-counterintuitively-preserve-more-elements-that-above-ground-buried-sites-see-degrade-over-the-normal-course-of-history/"}
---

“Most remarkable of all is La Draga, half-inundated by Lake Banyoles in Catalonia, where excavations above and below water have uncovered a village dating to 5300-5150 BCE. From the lake come the normally decayed paraphernalia of Neolithic life - wooden bowls, ladles, scoops, spindles, sickles, digging sticks and javelins, yew bows and willow or dogwood arrows, and of course baskets. Half a million grains of wheat, diverse other cereals, broad beans, peas, fruits and nuts also survive.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 219](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=205&annotation=KSFBJH6P))

#### Tarrus - La Draga Study

“A village dating from the early Neolithic was found at La Draga (Banyoles, Pla de l’Estany) in April 1990. The discovery, which was the result of work being carried out to turn the area into a park, was considered a minor archeological revolution.1 For the first time a prehistoric site in a lakeside environment had been found in the Iberian Peninsula and if, as seemed likely, wooden tools, handles and other objects similar to those found in chronologically comparable habitats in Alpine Europe were disinterred, this could contribute substantially to our knowledge of the early Neolithic.” ([Tarrús, 2008, p. 17](zotero://select/library/items/FZTZPCCC)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ZGEBHCNA?page=1&annotation=LGHJECFJ))

“The site must originally have occupied over 8,000 m2 but archeological investigations have concentrated on an area of 3,000 m2 located on the northern side of the settlement, which is the best preserved. This area has been fenced off and has gradually been converted into an archeological park devoted to everyday life in a Neolithic village and designed on the basis of the data yielded by the site itself. In its heyday the original village stretched for over 100 m along the Neolithic shoreline, in a north-south direction, and approximately 80 m inland towards the east. The excavations have shown that it was occupied during a single period of the early Neolithic,” ([Tarrús, 2008, p. 18](zotero://select/library/items/FZTZPCCC)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ZGEBHCNA?page=2&annotation=C5NMMN8H))

“On the other hand, in Sector B, which is also on dry land, and Sector C, which is now below water, the archeological relics have remained below the water table ever since the village was abandoned. Consequently the discovery of wood and basketry artefacts and posts and beams from Neolithic constructions, which had collapsed onto the archeological layer or been driven into it, has been a constant feature of the excavations and has enriched them enormously.” ([Tarrús, 2008, p. 19](zotero://select/library/items/FZTZPCCC)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ZGEBHCNA?page=3&annotation=4EWTSZ79))

“For wooden implements, on the other hand, they employed an astonishing variety of species, each suited to a particular function: box wood is by far the most widespread for making handles for all kinds of tools, yew is used almost exclusively for bows, while arrow shafts and heads were mostly made from willow or dogwood. Other items were made from oak, pine, holm oak, maple, laurel, elder, hazel, juniper, strawberry tree or apple wood. A form of wild clematis (Clematis vidalba) was used for binding, and ropes were made from linden bast (Fig. 4).” ([Tarrús, 2008, p. 21](zotero://select/library/items/FZTZPCCC)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ZGEBHCNA?page=5&annotation=5HCBXZD6))

“Personal ornaments, some of them veritable sumptuary items, were made from seashells, polished stone, animal bones and horns.” ([Tarrús, 2008, p. 26](zotero://select/library/items/FZTZPCCC)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ZGEBHCNA?page=10&annotation=3WLM4VHC))

“The preservation of organic materials is a unique characteristic of La Draga and endows it with special importance among prehistoric sites in the Iberian Peninsula. Thanks to the number and variety of the wooden objects found there, this early Neolithic village in northeastern Catalonia is an irreplaceable source of information on Neolithic implements made from perishable organic materials and has yielded the most important collection of finds from the period, both quantitatively and qualitatively.” ([Tarrús, 2008, p. 27](zotero://select/library/items/FZTZPCCC)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ZGEBHCNA?page=11&annotation=GI8DEK8Q))

“The studies carried out by Ramon Buxó (Museu d’Arqueologia de Catalunya) indicate that the agricultural production system at La Draga was fairly complex and varied. The inhabitants grew the same early Neolithic cereal crops as are usually found in the western Mediterranean: naked wheat, naked compact wheat, emmer wheat, naked and husked barley. Naked wheat is found in vast quantities; amounts of other crops are virtually residual.” ([Tarrús, 2008, p. 30](zotero://select/library/items/FZTZPCCC)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ZGEBHCNA?page=14&annotation=SPK2VKB4))

“Broad beans and peas were also grown: large quantities of beans were recovered from the archeological level in Sectors A and B, and a small number of peas in Sector A only. This leads us to believe that leguminous crops were cultivated in the village itself, probably on the muddy ground near the edge of the Lake. There is ample evidence that fruits, nuts and berries were gathered in the nearby woods: hazelnuts, walnuts, acorns, pine nuts, blackberries, sloes, crab apples, wild pears, cherries and grapes are found in large quantities.” ([Tarrús, 2008, p. 31](zotero://select/library/items/FZTZPCCC)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ZGEBHCNA?page=15&annotation=MMMUQQEI))