---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-ship-depiction-on-the-akrotiri-wall-paintings-are-prime-sources-of-ship-usage-in-16th-century-bce-aegean-islands/"}
---

“We have the Akrotiri wall-paintings, which depict masted ships raiding a coastline and participating in a short-range nautical procession. The latter, clearly engaged in a ritual event, were elaborately painted and propelled, save for one hastening ahead with its sail hoisted, by hordes of paddlers in an archaizing style reminiscent of older canoes. As on the earlier Cretan seals that announced the arrival of new shipping in the Aegean, the mast was single rather than bipod and had migrated back to midships since the Old Kingdom depictions, allowing the boat to steer a useful 90-100 degrees off the wind. Keels for better direction-holding only appeared in imagery in mid-millennium, but may have been invented earlier in the seas of the Levant or between these and the Aegean. Hardest to gauge is maximum ship size. One minimalist analysis avers that no seagoing ships substantially exceeded 20 tonnes in terms of cargo and 15 m (50 ft) in length. Yet, even accepting the unreliability of allusion to vessels several times this volume in the Middle Kingdom’s Tale of the Shipwrecked Sailor (a Red Sea saga that also featured fantastical giant lapis serpents), a brilliant interpretation of the [[Mit Rahina inscription\|Mit Rahina]] ship inventories as the world’s earliest bills of lading deduces vessels of at least 25 and possibly almost 70 tonnes in capacity. Wherever we set the limit, the abundance of small boats in the Akrotiri paintings, and as models at Byblos’s Obelisk temple, suggest that large ships were in fact heavily outnumbered by little, mundane craft. Even in 16th-century AD Genoa, arguably the Ugarit of its day, only 2 per cent of the ships recorded in customs registers exceeded 30 tonnes.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 373-74](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=350&annotation=UNWBCA3V))