---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-late-2nd-millennium-bce-saw-a-surge-of-innovation-in-maritime-technology/"}
---

“The late 2nd millennium BCE saw a surge of innovation in maritime technology. Sails lost their lower boom, becoming loose footed, and threaded with ‘brail’ rigging, so that their shape and angle could be more easily altered, allowing greater versatility in terms of handling to windward and so further freeing up their directions of travel. We do not know where or by whom these breakthroughs were invented, but they first appeared in mid-14th-century images in Egypt and Crete, and by about 1200 BCE they were ubiquitous. Some hulls became symmetrically double-prowed, often with avian figureheads, for even greater manoeuvrability at sea or in threading creeks and rivers. Ships became more diverse as well as nimble. One bifurcation, as at least some merchant shipping prioritized greater bulk capacity, led to the evolution of light, slender, many-oared galleys with an ancillary sail, particularly visibly in the Aegean. In effect these were more effective versions of the big canoes of earlier times in the east, and like them ideal for fast sprints (potentially repeated each day to become longer voyages), light cargos and coastal raids; they served, additionally, as platforms for sea-fights and foci of male affiliation. Unlike laden sailing craft, galleys could also draw straight up on the beach. Some sailing vessels appear to have become smaller, too, as the basic technology downscaled to offer cheaper, more risk-friendly options, and maybe hulls light enough to enable haulage across isthmuses, such as that at Corinth which cut out the sea-trek around the Peloponnese. This is borne out by shipwrecks, of which several are known from the decades on either side of 1200 BCE. The most illustrious, thanks to its pioneering place in underwater excavation, lies off Cape Gelidonya, on the same coast that had snared its more lavishly laden predecessor at Uluburun. We cannot tell whether the [[Gelidonya shipwreck\|Gelidonya shipwreck]] boat was rounded or galley-like, but it was only 10-12 m (33-40 ft) long and carried a mere tonne of metal, made up of standard copper ingots, a little tin, small recycled bronze ingots and scraps for melting down (suggestive of a mobile metalsmith), plus a motley array of pots, scarabs, weaponry and other gear. Tinier still, in today’s terms no more than a caique, was a boat that went down off Cape Iria, on its way to or from the Argolid with a humdrum cargo of Cretan stirrup jars, Cypriot pithoi, a cooking pot and diverse other containers. Plenty of such low-profile shipping certainly existed earlier too, beneath the exalted level defined by Uluburun, but its growing prominence and the insights from its cargos offer an alternative, trade-focused perspective on the activities of contemporary seafarers to the obsession with maritime violence reflected in the writing of hostile and fearful land-ruling monarchs.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 464-65](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=432&annotation=9FVYNHZT))