---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-dashur-boats-were-similarly-built-and-decorated-with-paint-and-eyes/"}
---

“The largest collection of excavated Egyptian water raft comes from the Middle Kingdom pyramid of Senwosret III at Dashur. Five, or six, wooden boats were uncovered there during a search for an underground entrance to the pyramid by Jacques de Morgan in 1894. De Morgan reported finding three boats, each about 10 meters long, beside a large brick chamber, probably a boat grave, and three other boats about 100 meters south of the first group.' Subsequent maps of the pyramid complex illustrate only three or five boats, however, and only three boats can definitely be traced to de Morgan's excavations.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 83](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=91&annotation=T49XWRYY))

“Radiocarbon dating on deck planks from the Field Museum vessel produced an average date of 1949 ± 47 B.C. and the Carnegie hull was dated to 1830 ± 170 BCE."

“Each boat exhibits about the same rounded shape and curvature with a slightly flattened midsection. In each example, the stern is slightly higher than the bow, and the boats are somewhat fuller aft of amidships (Fig. 35). Planks were built up around a thicker central strake, creating a planking shell. Deep mortise-and-tenon fastenings join thick planks worked into symmetrical strakes, and a second type of internal fastening across plank seams is also present (Fig. 36). Modern reconstruction of the vessels has obscured most of the evidence showing that the mortises filled by dovetail tenons were once ligatures (see Fastenings, below).” ([Ward, 2000, p. 84](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=92&annotation=LZWCN844))

“White plaster and traces of red, blue, and black stripes remain on the outer hull of each of the Dashur boats. The once-lovely painted *wdeat*-eyes, rosettes, and stylized lotus leaves on the steering oars of EM 4925 and EM 4926 have faded, leaving a negative impression on the wood's surface, and only a little red paint remains on stanchions described as having green and red stripes. A small patch of red paint on the outside of Carnegie plank S2-3 suggests that its lower hull may have been painted red; green paint over plaster imbedded in adze marks on the outer surface of the after plank in the central strake of EM 4925 is difficult to reconcile with Reisener's description of a yellow hull.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 96](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=104&annotation=H6AE997Q))

“When finished, the hull had the same proportions, shape, and decoration of Middle Kingdom funerary models like the one illustrated in Figure 46.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 97](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=105&annotation=ILHYY9QV))