---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-gudea-statue-as-evidence-of-long-distance-trade/"}
---

#USE in [[Maritime History Podcast/01 Episode Transcripts/Series 1 - The Bronze Age/(OLD) 003 - Sargon to Hammurabi - Trade and Turmoil in Ancient Mesopotamia\|(OLD) 003 - Sargon to Hammurabi - Trade and Turmoil in Ancient Mesopotamia]]

### the Gudea statue as evidence of long-distance trade

“[[Gudea\|Gudea]]'s rather immobile face and expressionless features have become familiar to the modern student from the numerous statues of him that have been recovered. Some of these carry long inscriptions recording his religious activities in connection with the building and rebuilding of Lagash's more important temples. From them we learn that, in spite of Gutian domination, Gudea had trade contacts with practically the entire "civilized" world of those days. He obtained gold from Anatolia and Egypt, silver from the Taurus range, cedars from the Amanus, copper from the Zagros, diorite from Egypt, carnelian from Ethiopia, and timber from [[Encyclopedia/02 Places/Dilmun\|Dilmun]]” ([Kramer, 1963, p. 67](zotero://select/library/items/TI24BNVH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EY8R4485?page=67&annotation=2RA2IHKF)) 

### [[Gudea\|Gudea]] traded with [[Encyclopedia/02 Places/Magan and Meluhha\|Magan and Meluhha]]

“A Mesopotamian leader named Gudea, who ruled the Sumerian kingdom of Lagash in the twenty-second century, used riches from Meluhha in the lavish decorations of a temple he constructed that was dedicated to the local god Ningirsu: “He brought ebony wood from the land of Meluhha and used it to build for (the god). . . . He brought gold ore from the land of Meluhha and fashioned it into a quiver for him.” Gudea also acquired carnelian, lapis, and tin from Meluhha. Most of these goods didn’t actually originate in the Indus Valley; in fact, tin isn’t found in South Asia at all. They must have been traded to Meluhha from even farther away. According to Gudea, the Meluhhans actually came to Mesopotamia with the luxury goods for his temple, just as they had in Sargon’s reign. It seems that some of them even settled there; around 2060 BCE, in the Ur III period, men from the “Meluhha village” were mentioned (in some otherwise routine administrative records) living and working next to local Mesopotamians. The Meluhhan foreigners still spoke their native language, but, to judge from the inscriptions on their seals, it was changing. By then they probably had no direct contact with their homeland.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 96](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=121&annotation=G7ZPSDTC))

==“Back then, Magan, like Meluhha, still had direct ties with his kingdom, as it had with the earlier kingdom founded by Sargon. In fact, Gudea must have had a special relationship with the place, since he had commissioned any number of statues of his portrait carved out of shiny black diorite from Magan. These statues all show him the same way; a squat, muscular man, usually wearing a round cap. His face was beardless and his bald pate was usually invisible under his cap. Sometimes he was seated, some- times standing with his hands folded. In one statue he had a tablet on his lap inscribed with a plan of a temple, to highlight his achievements as a builder. Gudea was oddly proud of the fact that his statues were made of stone, without inlay or other precious attachments. He wrote that he had “brought a diorite stone from Magan (and) shaped it into this stone statue. . . . The statue is (made of ) neither precious metal nor lapis lazuli; from neither copper nor tin nor bronze did the man sculpt it.”” ([Podany, 2012, p. 98](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=123&annotation=P3CSNQ2G))==

“Gudea writes that he obtained diorite for his statues from Magan and wood for the building of his temple Eninnu from both [[Encyclopedia/02 Places/Magan and Meluhha\|Magan and Meluhha]].” ([Kramer, 1963, p. 276](zotero://select/library/items/TI24BNVH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EY8R4485?page=276&annotation=4GUNEFWW))