---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-following-of-horus/"}
---

#### Morris 2018

“Although the evidence is frustratingly sparse, it seems that already in the Nagada III period, the Abydene kings had instituted a regular “royal progress” to address all three concerns, which is a tactic common to old and new world empires alike. Royal annals and early year names demonstrate that every other year an event called the “Following of Horus” took place. Judging from its determinative, the travel occurred by boat, and the reference to Horus as well as the prominence of this event in the records strongly suggest the personal participation of the king. When attested in the Second Dynasty (c. 2890–2686) this progress could take place in conjunction with a “count”—sometimes specified as assessing fields or gold. The combination of these two events has convinced many scholars that the progress had always served in part as a census and/or resource assessment. As the government became naturalized, however, more of a state than an empire, the personal participation of the pharaoh appears no longer to have been deemed necessary, and the system was replaced at least in part by a biennial cattle count. From that time on, highly ritualized royal journeys throughout the length of the country seem to have been undertaken primarily upon a ruler’s accession to the throne.” ([Morris, 2018, p. 33](zotero://select/library/items/JDKXRVLF)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/T6H4DPKC?page=47&annotation=SWJB2I9F))

“Thus, in a time before the mass distribution of imperial propaganda, the best way to create an investment in the power of the ruler among the widely dispersed population of the countryside was to bring him to them in what may have been, perhaps, an ancient version of shock and awe.” ([Morris, 2018, p. 33](zotero://select/library/items/JDKXRVLF)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/T6H4DPKC?page=47&annotation=HPRHIXCG))

“So the progress was a chance to exhibit the divine personage of the ruler before his people, and it was also a chance for the king and court to assess for themselves the wealth and loyalty of the provinces. Typically, on such journeys the king received gifts and thus augmented his treasury with whatever prestige goods could be mustered locally, but the progress also occasionally served an ulterior motive of simultaneously assessing and consuming local surplus. Receiving the king was a great honor, but it typically incurred fantastic expense for the host, as feasts fit for a king (and his elaborate retinue) needed to be assembled and prepared and ceremonial architecture fit to receive a king constructed. Thus, such visits were best spaced at least a couple of years apart, as was the Following of Horus, to give the provinces time to recover from the expenditure of the last royal visit and to accumulate adequate supplies for the next.” ([Morris, 2018, p. 34](zotero://select/library/items/JDKXRVLF)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/T6H4DPKC?page=48&annotation=VCBX8V3D))

“If the full‐blown ceremonial that accompanied the Following of Horus eventually came to be seen by Egypt’s population more as a burden than an honor, this may account for the fact that the custom is poorly attested following the First Dynasty. Indeed it is possible that the rulers of the Second Dynasty largely abandoned the custom of participating in the biennial progress—along with the even more egregious custom of retainer sacrifice—as part of a set of reforms intended to distinguish this dynasty from its predecessor. As will be discussed in Chapter 6, Thutmose III’s annual armed visitation to SyriaPalestine in the New Kingdom bore many similarities to a royal progress, but it too would be abandoned in a relatively short time, presumably due to being deemed unnecessary, exploitative, and/or ineffective.” ([Morris, 2018, p. 34](zotero://select/library/items/JDKXRVLF)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/T6H4DPKC?page=48&annotation=KEEY8DE2))

 ==“The two arguments presented here find cross‐cultural parallels elsewhere. The notion that the flag follows trade is not at odds with the more famous reverse statement that trade follows the flag. It simply places emphasis not on the role of the colonies in trade but on the role of trade in inciting an acquisitive desire on the part of one polity to control the resources of another directly. Thus, the very prosperity that the Nubian rulers enjoyed as a result of trade with Upper Egyptian aggrandizers is what eventually brought Egypt’s armies upon them. Likewise, trade between Upper and Lower Egypt resulted in an increasing drive on the part of the former to control not only Lower Egypt, but also, eventually, that region’s trading partners in southern Canaan. Those polities that traded with Europe in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries found similarly that military men followed quickly upon the heels of merchants. Indeed, innumerable examples of much the same phenomenon could be culled from ancient times up until the present day.” ([Morris, 2018, p. 35](zotero://select/library/items/JDKXRVLF)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/T6H4DPKC?page=49&annotation=VDWSEHSF))==

“For most of its history, pharaonic Egypt stretched—at bare minimum—all along the Nile’s floodplain from the First Cataract to the Mediterranean Sea. Yet at the dawn of the state there was nothing traditional about these borders, and neither was there any precedent for the rule of a single god‐king over a nation. Local peoples and polities, it seemed, required persuasion before this particular ideological “truth” would be accepted as self‐evident. As William J. Adams rather cynically summed up their project, Egypt’s pharaohs, for the first several centuries they held power, “were chiefly engaged in consolidating the realm and subjugating their own people.”” ([Morris, 2018, p. 35](zotero://select/library/items/JDKXRVLF)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/T6H4DPKC?page=49&annotation=9AYDQ4GU))


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><a class="markdown-embed-link" href="/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-following-of-horus-as-seen-at-nag-el-hamdulab/" aria-label="Open link"><svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="svg-icon lucide-link"><path d="M10 13a5 5 0 0 0 7.54.54l3-3a5 5 0 0 0-7.07-7.07l-1.72 1.71"></path><path d="M14 11a5 5 0 0 0-7.54-.54l-3 3a5 5 0 0 0 7.07 7.07l1.71-1.71"></path></svg></a><div class="markdown-embed">




#### Darnell 2015

“The scenes and the hieroglyphic annotation together reveal that the Nag el-Hamdulab cycle relates to the Following of Horus in what at the time would have been a still somewhat ill-defined border area between pharaonic Egypt and A-Group Nubia. The images of the Nag el-Hamdulab cycle provide further evidence for an association of solar-Sokarian vessels with First Dynasty royal ritual, and for a connection between those vessels and the activities of a royal nautical festival, perhaps an element of the Jubilee.” ([Coleman Darnell, 2015, p. 21](zotero://select/library/items/8JW3W4KT)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/JLTCXU3T?page=3&annotation=7JHLR6GV))

“no larger or more visually central or dominant than other participants in the activities depicted, as in the decoration on the Gebelein Linen (Donadoni Roveri, D’Amicone & Leospo 1994: 21-22, figs. 4-7), the images of the Hierakonpolis Tomb 100 cycle (Quibell & Green 1902: pls. 75-79), and the early Protodynastic memorial tableau at Gebel Tjauti in the Theban Western Desert (Friedman, Hendrickx, with Darnell, in Darnell et al. 2002: 10-19 and pls. 9-11). A change occurs at the dawn of the dynastic age, however, and the ruler with crown and regalia assumes a more central position, repeated within the various segments of a larger cycle of images—as in the imagery so common in the temples of dynastic Egypt, iconographically the true pharaoh could indeed be in multiple places at one time.” ([Coleman Darnell, 2015, p. 22](zotero://select/library/items/8JW3W4KT)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/JLTCXU3T?page=4&annotation=BAX5MIMP))


==“A plausible transliteration and translation of the early hieroglyphic text at Nag el-Hamdulab is:==

**Transliteration** ¥msw <-¡r->a nHbb BAc 

==**Translation** 
Nautical Following (of Horus); taxation of Panther-Skin-Town” ==

([Coleman Darnell, 2015, p. 29](zotero://select/library/items/8JW3W4KT)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/JLTCXU3T?page=11&annotation=8K6U63GP))

“The Nag el-Hamdulab cycle is the earliest depiction in the by then well-established line of images that belong to scenes of royal navigation—perhaps more specifically the Jubilee cycle (Williams & Logan 1987; Leblanc 2011)—to bear an accompanying hieroglyphic annotation. The brief Hamdulab early hieroglyphic text is consistent with known Archaic hieroglyphic inscriptions, and the closest parallels for an Early Dynastic navigation with early hieroglyphic annotation are the twin annotated rock inscription images of a boat carrying a smaller vessel in the Wadi of the Horus Qa-a, northwest of Luxor, dating probably to the reign of Qa-a at the end of the First Dynasty (Darnell 2009: 102-103; 2011). In these scenes of royal navigation with early hieroglyphic annotations—the Nag el-Hamdulab tableau and the two scenes from the Wadi of the Horus Qa-a—vessels associated with Sokar are present, in the Hamdulab scenes boats like the later @nw-bark, in the Qa-a Wadi images the Maaty-bark.” ([Coleman Darnell, 2015, p. 35](zotero://select/library/items/8JW3W4KT)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/JLTCXU3T?page=17&annotation=5HP9EUCY))

“==The appearance of the first of the small, Upper Egyptian step pyramids coincides with the cessation of the perambulating Following of Horus visits (Dreyer & Kaiser 1980: 56-59; Gundlach 1994: 70; Redford 1986: 89), and represents an anchoring of the royal cult (Seidlmayer 1996: 123-124; Wilkinson 1999: 277-279), and associated economic aspects thereof, within the greater Egyptian landscape.== The Elephantine complex of ritual and economic activity, with manifestation of royal authority, roughly corresponds temporally to the great changes in provincial administration and agricultural domains under Snofru (Moreno Garcia 1999: 235 et passim), and may directly have replaced the activities that appear in the Nag el-Hamdulab cycle.” ([Coleman Darnell, 2015, p. 37](zotero://select/library/items/8JW3W4KT)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/JLTCXU3T?page=19&annotation=WU7F4VPC))

#### Hendrickx 2012

“The Nag el-Hamdulab cycle may be said to show the emergence of the ruler as supreme human priest and incarnate manifestation of human and divine power. The Nag el-Hamdulab cycle is also the first complex iconographic composition with accompanying hieroglyphic annotation.  

That text refers to the ‘Nautical Following (of Horus)’, the biennial progress of the royal court on a perambulating judicial and tax-collecting visit to demonstrate royal authority throughout the land, and may therefore be the earliest record of tax collection we have from Egypt, and the first expression of royal economic control over Egypt and most probably also Nubia.” ([Hendrickx et al., 2012, pp. 1,082](zotero://select/library/items/EWJ5D5I4)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/U49CD5KL?page=15&annotation=K6A582J5))

“The final element of the first tableau at site 7 is a four-sign hieroglyphic inscription immediately behind the stern of the uppermost boat and above the prow of the final vessel (Figure 11). The hieroglyphs are fully pecked in the style of the images of the tableaux, possess the same degree of patination, and are certainly elements of the tableau. Palaeographically of Early Dynastic date, the annotation refers to a ‘nautical following’ and appears to label the imagery—and apparently the entirety of the Nag el-Hamdulab cycle—as ultimately related to the royal and ritual event known as the ‘Following of Horus’, the biennial judicial and tax-collecting perambulation of the royal court as demonstration of royal authority, here further related to a toponym that unfortunately cannot be located (cf. Wilkinson 1999: 220–21).” ([Hendrickx et al., 2012, pp. 1,081](zotero://select/library/items/EWJ5D5I4)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/U49CD5KL?page=14&annotation=TSLHBLE8)) 


</div></div>



<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><a class="markdown-embed-link" href="/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-following-of-horus-as-described-on-the-palermo-stone/" aria-label="Open link"><svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="svg-icon lucide-link"><path d="M10 13a5 5 0 0 0 7.54.54l3-3a5 5 0 0 0-7.07-7.07l-1.72 1.71"></path><path d="M14 11a5 5 0 0 0-7.54-.54l-3 3a5 5 0 0 0 7.07 7.07l1.71-1.71"></path></svg></a><div class="markdown-embed">




The government’s ambition to control every aspect of the national economy is underlined by two measures introduced in the First Dynasty. Both are attested on the Palermo Stone, a fragment of royal annals that were compiled in the Fifth Dynasty, around 2400, and stretched back to the beginning of recorded history. The earliest surviving entry, for a First Dynasty king, probably Narmer’s immediate successor, Aha, concerns an event called the “Following of Horus,” which evidently took place every two years. Most probably, it consisted of a journey by the king and his court along the Nile Valley. In common with the royal progresses of Tudor England, it would have served several purposes at once. It allowed the monarch to be a visible presence in the life of his subjects; enabled his officials to keep a close eye on everything that was happening in the country at large, implementing policies, resolving disputes, and dispensing justice; defrayed the costs of maintaining the court, and removed the burden of supporting it year-round in one location; and, last but by no means least, facilitated the systematic assessment and levying of taxes. (A little later, in the Second Dynasty, the court explicitly recognized the actuarial potential of the Following of Horus. Thereafter, the event was combined with a formal census of the country’s agricultural wealth.) From the third reign of the First Dynasty, the Palermo Stone also records the height of the annual Nile inundation, measured in cubits and fractions of a cubit (one ancient Egyptian cubit equals 20.6 inches). The reason why the court would have wished to measure and archive this information every year is simple: the height of the inundation directly affected the level of agricultural yield the following season, and would therefore have allowed the royal treasury to determine the appropriate level of taxation. ([Location 926](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FGMZAI&location=926))(Wilkinson 2010, p. 44–45)

</div></div>
