---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-rock-cut-khafre-boats-are-the-most-unusual-example-of-boats-from-ancient-egypt/"}
---

“The most unusual ancient Egyptian hulls may be the rock-cut boats of Khafra (c. 2500 BCE). The pyramid complex of Khafra lies west of Khufu's, and it includes at least four subterranean boat-shaped cuttings in the rock plateau, excavated by Selim Hassan in 1934 (Fig. 24). Straight-sided trenches 1.0 or 1.1 meters wide descend into the limestone plateau where the hulls and other features are carved out of the rock. If a substance such as plaster or epoxy resin were poured into the rock-cut boats and the surrounding rock chipped away, a solid model of a vessel more than 20 meters long would remain. A pair of boats is aligned on an east-west axis on each side of the causeway leading to the mortuary temple; a possibly rectangular pit and another unfinished pit run along a north-south axis nearby.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 70](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=78&annotation=H47EG4JR))

“The rock-cut boats of Khafra represent hulls that, had they been made of wood, could have travelled on the Nile. The hull shapes and such fittings as are represented are in accord with a long tradition of shipbuilding that stretches as far back as the Early Dynastic boats from Abydos. Khafra Boats 1-4 exhibit lines similar to those of ancient Egyptian wooden hulls and boat models. They are 40-47 cubits long, 7 or 10 cubits wide, and 3 cubits deep. Floor timber proportions and placement are remarkably similar to the system used to place deck beams in the Khufu I hull. If we knew more about the floor timbers of that hull, we might find the Khafra pattern reflected even more closely.

With the exception of the uneven and poorly defined floor timbers of Boat 2, the Khafra hulls reflect Old Kingdom hull construction as we know it from the Khufu hulls. Identical cabin heights in Boats 1 and 3 and Khufu I suggest standardization of size. The conformity of the Khafra boats to principles evident in the Khufu vessels suggests that a master shipwright supervised the masons who cut the boats.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 76](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=84&annotation=JHETREFW))