---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-mycenaeans-compared-to-the-minoans/"}
---

“Mycenae, the apparent destination of the Alashiyan gift (from the [[Encyclopedia/06 Ships/Uluburun shipwreck\|Uluburun shipwreck]]), was not as integrally tied into the network of diplomatic relationships as the other Amarna period powers. No letters from a Mycenaean king showed up among the Amarna correspondence. And yet it was not for lack of wealth—Mycenae was a very rich place—nor even for lack of contact.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 259](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=284&annotation=TT2CMICI))

“The Minoan traders and artists of Crete from Thutmose III’s time had by now largely been subsumed into the civilization of the Mycenaean Greeks. The Mycenaeans adopted some of the best ideas of the Minoans, such as their writing system (which they modified to write their own Greek language in a script known as Linear B), and some of the shapes and designs of their pottery and wall paintings. But where the Minoans had preferred images of dolphins and landscapes on their walls and vases, the Mycenaeans often painted shields and chariots. In death, the faces of the Mycenaean kings were adorned with lifelike gold masks that portrayed their full beards (very different from the clean-shaven Minoans), and they were armed with weapons to use in the afterlife. By the fourteenth century BCE, fortification walls surrounded their cities. The stone blocks of the walls were so huge and so exactly placed that later Greeks could scarcely believe they had been built by mere humans; they called the walls Cyclopean, imagining them to be the work of a race of superhuman Cyclopes. The Mycenaean people were not afraid of war; they seem to have welcomed it. In the Iliad and the Odyssey, Homer later remembered the Mycenaeans as the brave fighters of the Trojan War. The stories were mostly fiction, but some of the details have proved to be accurate. Even helmets made of boars’ tusks, which Homer mentions, have been found on Mycenaean sites and in some of their images of warriors.  

Greece was short on agricultural land and long on shoreline, so the Mycenaeans, like the Minoans before them, looked at the Mediterranean as a highway to other places where they might enrich themselves. They spread out around the Aegean, settling in Crete and other islands and establishing colonies on the Western Anatolian coast. But the Mycenaeans seem not to have taken to the sea with quite the enthusiasm of the Minoans. Their images don’t show up on Egyptian tombs. They seem to have depended on others, like the Canaanite merchants of the Uluburun ship, to transport their goods abroad and to bring foreign materials to Greece. Artisans in a glass workshop in the Greek city of Tiryns and others in an ivory workshop in Mycenae both used raw materials from Canaan. Mycenaean artists also made use of imported stone, ivory, carnelian, and lapis lazuli in their artworks.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 259](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=284&annotation=9P6QPEXM))