---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-hittites-as-a-new-power-structure-around-1500-bce/"}
---

“This intricately balanced phase of interconnections was closed by the rise of Babylon in the south and interstate warfare in the north from which emerged, in the late 17th century BCE, a parallel, and in this case first, supra-regional power in Anatolia, the Hittite kingdom of Hath, with its capital at Hattusa (modern Bogazkoy) in the north-central highlands of modern Turkey. While the Kanesh archive hangs beyond the basin’s edges as a hint of what we might be missing elsewhere within it, Hatti’s first intervention in the Mediterranean was brutally direct and went after booty and tribute, a strategy that entailed the sacking of Yamhad, Alalakh and Ebla, in the last case the final blow to a venerable city. By 1500 BCE the outline of a new power structure was starting to crystallize in this part of the Mediterranean.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 367](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=343&annotation=L9XSPTKD))

“No one knows exactly why, but the extensive trade between Assyria and Anatolia collapsed around 1750 BCE, right around the time that [[Hammurabi\|Hammurabi]] died. Probably traders continued to travel back and forth, since silver would still have been needed in Mesopotamia and tin in Anatolia, but perhaps it took place on a smaller scale, without the necessity for Mesopotamians to continue to reside in Anatolian towns. At any rate, their cuneiform tablets are no longer found.  

Another change was taking place around this same time in Anatolia: the increasing dominance of a group of people who spoke a language we call Hittite (their land came to be known as Hatti). The Hittite language was Indo- European and is therefore related to most modern European languages; it was the earliest Indo-European language to be written down, but far from the earliest to be spoken. It was quite distinct from the earlier Hattic language that had been spoken in Anatolia. Hittite-speaking peoples seem to have arrived in Anatolia in the third millennium BCE, bringing with them their gods and traditions. Later they came to dominate the land.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 107](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=132&annotation=3QNYCH85))