---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-hittites-and-suppiluliuma-i-fracture-the-near-east-peace-by-1325-bce/"}
---

“In his fury Suppiluliuma put aside all fond thoughts about the long friendship that had existed with Egypt, and he went on a rampage. In a prayer, Mursili II wrote, “My father became hostile, went to Egyptian territory, and attacked Egyptian territory. He killed the infantry and chariotry of Egypt.” A new pharaoh took the throne in Egypt, but he wasn’t a member of the royal family—there were no male heirs left, as Ankhesenamen had bemoaned. He was a man named Ay, an elderly courtier who had served under Akhenaten. Ay sent a messenger with a letter to Suppiluliuma, apparently trying to sooth that king’s ire, to call upon their “brotherhood” as great kings, and to assure him that he, Ay, wasn’t responsible for Zannanza’s death. Suppiluliuma, however, was unconvinced. A draft of an angry response to the letter was found in his archive in Hattusa. Suppiluliuma launched a new war against Syria, including the territories there that Egypt controlled. It was to last much longer than his first Syrian war—five long years.  

By 1326 BCE, the Near East was very different from the place that it had been when Suppiluliuma took the throne just eighteen years earlier. The peace had proved far more fragile than the great kings might have thought, especially when confronted with the ambitions of Suppiluliuma to reclaim lands that he thought were rightfully his. But it wasn’t just Suppiluliuma’s doing; small events had cascaded out of control.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 288](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=313&annotation=B7845RGF))