---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-lisht-boat-models-may-show-that-solar-boats-and-funerary-boats-were-different-concepts-to-the-egyptians-and-used-differently/"}
---

“In 1914, excavators for the Metropolitan Museum of Art (MMA) discovered a pair of boat models outside the southern enclosure wall of the Dynasty 12 mastaba of Imhotep, buried more than a meter below ground level. lmhotep' s titles include Hereditary Prince and Count, Treasurer, High Priest of Heliopolis, Prince of Horus, Prince of Min, Chief Scribe of Divine Records, Superintendent of Land, Superintendent of All Works, and King's Favorite. Imhotep probably was the architect of the pyramid of Senwosret I. Because the model boats, here called the Lisht models, were buried outside his tomb's southern enclosure wall, some questions about their origins have been raised. Their shape and decoration places them in a class known as funerary vessels.

The larger Lisht model, 2.75 meters long, had been protected by a mud-brick vault and was in excellent condition. Carved from a solid piece of wood with separate papyriforrn finials, its bow pointed west. Traces of red paint remained on the bulwark. 3 This model is displayed in the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

The discovery of two modeI boats with papyriform ends like those of Khufu I buried end-to-end on the south side of a funerary enclose--and the location of the Dashur boats on the south side of the pyramid of Senwosret III--suggests that all of these vessels might have served similar ceremonial functions. Although the Khufu ship has a more elaborate planking plan, its basic construction pattern is similar to that of the Dashur boats and Lisht model. ([Ward, 2000, p. 106](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=114&annotation=WQQCF634))

“The burial of two solar boat models with very different equipment within the same funerary complex suggests that the funerary boat and solar boat existed as separate conceptual entities in Egyptian funerary practice. If the solar and funerary models were seen this way, and Middle Kingdom burial practices reflect Old Kingdom traditions, Khufu I cannot be a solar boat and must instead be a funerary craft (See Ch. 5). The planked model boat from Lisht is valuable to ship scholars not only for its unusual method of construction, but because it shows that there was an accepted norm for the construction of ceremonial vessels in the Middle Kingdom. The size of the 1.95-meter-Iong Lisht model, buried near the mastaba of a high priest, supports the interpretation of the later interment of six, 10-meter-long, cedar hulls as a kingly display of wealth and power at Dashur.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 106](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=114&annotation=KWFRBA2Y))