---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-minoans-were-a-maritime-trading-people-who-needed-natural-resources-and-traded-with-egypt-and-the-near-east/"}
---

“The urban civilization that was flourishing in Crete had been developing from the time that Hammurabi’s ancestors first began to rule in Babylon, around 2000 BCE. The towns in Crete were not fortified, unlike those in Mesopotamia and Syria, and they were centered around extensive monumental structures that were probably palaces. The uncertainty on this point, and many others, comes from the fact that the Minoans on Crete—just like the Meluhhans in the Indus Valley region—wrote in a script that has not yet been deciphered” ([Podany, 2012, p. 109](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=134&annotation=CW27WP3A))

“We do know that the Minoans were seafarers, trading their wares across the Mediterranean. They needed metals, which were not native to their island, so they obtained tin from Mari and copper from Cyprus, and they probably got gold from Egypt. With these raw materials they created highly sophisticated metal vessels, figurines, and swords. This raises the question, what did the Minoans provide in exchange? They had plenty of olive trees and vines from which to produce oil and wine, and analysis of some Minoan pottery has revealed that they manufactured perfumed oils that would have been valued not just as perfume but also in medicine and religious ceremonies. They probably also traded other goods that leave few archaeological traces, like expensive purple dye (from crushed murex shells), spices, honey, and textiles” ([Podany, 2012, p. 110](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=135&annotation=RTGM3YI9))

#### Minoans Known as ‘Keftiu’ to the Egyptians

“Archaeological evidence confirms that the Minoans had ties to both the Eastern Mediterranean region and Egypt. The Minoan relationship with Egypt seems to have been strong, to judge from the extent of the finds. Some fragments of Minoan pots even showed up in a village in Egypt built in the 1870s BCE for workmen who were constructing a pyramid. It’s an odd place for them to be, so far from the halls of power, and the pots were ordinary ones, not luxury vessels. Perhaps they belonged to some Minoan workers who were helping to build the pyramid (though one wonders what role they might have played, and how they might have been recruited), or perhaps to a Minoan wife of an Egyptian workman. The land of Keftiu (the Egyptian spelling for Kaptara) is mentioned in just one known text from Egypt at this time, though it was named many more times later. Many Egyptian objects have been found in Crete as well—all manner of jars, stone bowls, amulets, statuettes, scarabs and beads—far outnumbering objects from the Levant, Cyprus, Anatolia, or Meso- potamia. Many scholars also detect Egyptian influences in Minoan art.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 110](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=135&annotation=YCCWE6BN))

#### Minoans had very little direct contact with Mesopotamia

“Oddly enough, not a single Minoan object has shown up anywhere in Mesopotamia proper, even though Mesopotamian cities were trading with the same coastal Mediterranean ports as the Minoans. A lone Mesopotamian seal and a separate seal impression found in Crete provide the sole evidence of any direct connection between the Minoans and the Mesopotamians.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 111](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=136&annotation=JWEBG2XV))