---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-island-of-cyprus-became-the-main-source-of-copper-and-is-known-as-alashiya-in-the-source-texts-of-connected-ancient-civilizations/"}
---

“The key, as suggested at the end of the previous chapter, was copper, for which Cyprus is one of the largest sources in the world, and the timing related to the introduction of techniques to work its previously intractable sulphide ores – plus, we can now add, the decline of Omani copper sources, which had hitherto served as the bulk supplier to Mesopotamia. Mine galleries are visible by the 19th century BCE at Ambelikou, and by the 18th-17th centuries the export of copper is attested archaeologically and textually, the latter mainly from Mari, where we encounter the name Alashiya, long to be associated with the island.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 367](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=343&annotation=SVE6FHHB))

“Not only did Mari sell tin to Crete, it also obtained copper from Cyprus, which was known as Alashiya. Alashiya was becoming an important alternative to Magan and Dilmun when Mesopotamian and Syrian kingdoms sought copper for their bronzes. Alashiya had other contacts in Syria as well. A cuneiform list from a site near the Syrian coast mentions objects that came from Alashiya. Archaeological finds on the island of Cyprus show that this was just when the earliest towns began to be built there and the first copper mines began to be worked. Zimri-Lim might well have met some Alashiyan merchants in [[Ugarit\|Ugarit]] during his visit, and seen their boats setting out across the Mediterranean.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 111](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=136&annotation=S5QWXVMP))

#### Cyprus seems to have been outside direct contact with Mesopotamia

“These islands seem, though, to have been beyond the reach of Syrian or Mesopotamian boats at this time. No groups of Mesopotamian- or Syrian- based “Kaptaran traders” are mentioned in the documents who might have taken on the role that Ea-nasir enjoyed in [[Encyclopedia/02 Places/Dilmun\|Dilmun]], and no cuneiform tablets have been found on Crete or Cyprus from this era; there was nothing (so far as we know) like the karum communities in Anatolian cities. But perhaps this was not true of Egypt. Amenemhet II, of the powerful Twelfth Dynasty, claimed to have conquered Cyprus during his reign. This seems impossibly unlikely. The Egyptians had no navy, and all other indications suggest that Alashiya was independent. But perhaps Egyptian trading boats did venture to the island.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 111](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=136&annotation=F6YMFI85))