---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-repurposed-planks-from-lisht-give-us-insight-into-how-freight-ships-were-constructed-to-carry-heavier-loads/"}
---

The planks and framing elements from Lisht offer new perspectives on ancient Egyptian shipbuilding techniques. The hull planking demonstrates a previously unrecorded manner of hull construction using plaited lashing, intricate fitting of timbers, and deep mortise-and-tenon joints wedged in place by slips. Each of these features is present in some form on either the Khufu or Dashur vessels, but the combination of them is unique, and offers insight to a controversial passage in Herodotus (2.96.1-2) describing ancient Egyptian shipbuilding in the fifth century BCE. 

The Herodotus passage, often applied to any Egyptian ship from any period, has been interpreted as saying that the Egyptians caulk the seams of their vessels from within with papyrus. No trace of caulking has been found in any ancient Egyptian hull, however, and we have no evidence for the practice. Caulking is not used in shell-built watercraft anywhere. When the passage is evaluated from both lexicographical and ship construction viewpoints, it is clear that Herodotus could have been describing plank seams bound or fastened from within by papyrus, a practice which corresponds to the use of lashing in the Lisht timbers.

In addition to providing ship scholars with a new form of construction, the Lisht timbers are the first remains of what was probably a working boat to be studied. Both the Khufu and the Dashur vessels are from ceremonial contexts, and they reflect a different branch of Egyptian nautical technology that was unconcerned with "commercial freight." The technology used to combat strain and stress caused by the transport of great weights may be similar to that used in the construction of seagoing vessels, another point of contention among ship scholars. At the very least, studying the Lisht timbers informs us about what was possible for ancient Egyptian shipwrights.” ([Ward, 2000, p. 124](zotero://select/library/items/Z98WYCE6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/UD954MWU?page=132&annotation=995P9R4K))