---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-3-centuries-of-800-to-500-bce-saw-the-mediterranean-fully-integrate-into-what-can-be-viewed-as-a-single-large-network/"}
---

“In the space of three busy centuries between 800 and 500 BCE the final elements in the long, complex evolution of Mediterranean ways of life slotted into place, to form the picture so familiar from what is customarily, if somewhat quaintly, known as ‘ancient history’. Over this time span, criss-crossing currents render a region-by-region approach meaningless, as well as counter to the trend of connections and convergence. But two phases can still be discerned. The first, a fairly direct consequence of developments explored in the later parts of Chapter 9, and still fluid and emergent in its properties, lay in the 8th century BCE, extending into the early 7th century. The participating zone remained largely as before, with southern France and its neighbours, the inner Adriatic and most of North Africa still going their own ways. Yet like Schubert’s ‘Unfinished’ Eighth Symphony, the Mediterranean’s 8th-century symphony remained incomplete. Its last movements, our second phase, overlapped with their predecessors during the 7th century but found fullest expression after 600 BCE. This phase saw the Mediterranean’s cultural, social and economic activities intensify and its networks fill out to incorporate most of the basin, and reach well beyond. Simultaneously, rules of engagement between people and places became more codified and rationalized, in ways that would shape some of the most brilliant, as well as the most disturbing, features of the Classical and later Mediterranean.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 506](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=473&annotation=269JR5RV))

“In other words, even if the beginnings of this pan-Mediterranean trade network possessed a world-systemic tinge, any zoning into a core in the east versus a central and western periphery rapidly dissolved into a shifting world where exploiters and exploited existed everywhere.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 514](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=481&annotation=XLEQ4H3M))