---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-travel-of-zimri-lim-1770-bce-to-ugarit-and-potential-ties-with-cyprus-crete-and-the-aegean/"}
---

“He spent several weeks in Aleppo, no doubt enjoying the hospitality of his host, while his envoys traveled to nearby kingdoms to present and receive gifts. Then, in July, he journeyed on to the city of [[Ugarit\|Ugarit]] on the coast. Perhaps Zimri-Lim had never seen the sea before. What must he have thought on first glimpsing the crisp deep blue line that marked the meeting of sea and sky? His people believed that this sea surrounded the earth, so one would have thought that the horizon marked the edge of the world, right there within sight. But Zimri-Lim knew already that this was not the edge—there were people who lived beyond the horizon on islands called Kaptara (now Crete) and [[Alashiya\|Alashiya]] (Cyprus). In fact, his officials sold some of the tin that Zimri-Lim had brought with him to the chief merchant from Kaptara. They also paid twenty shekels of tin to a translator who helped with the transaction.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 108](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=133&annotation=RI4CAJAK))

“Zimri-Lim might have come across people from Crete in other places during his stay. He visited a village called Alahtum (probably later called Alalakh) during his month-long vacation in Ugarit, and there he might have seen artists from Kaptara decorating the walls with frescoes in the Aegean style. (This style, and the whole Bronze Age civilization on Crete, is known as [[Minoan\|Minoan]] because the British excavators who first encountered it saw a connection to the mythical King Minos of Greek legend.) 

Such wall paintings (and even floor paintings) were all the rage in the Levant at the time. The rulers at Qatna and at a place now called Tel Kabri had some too—beautiful landscapes with palm trees, papyrus plants, and wild animals, and seascapes with leaping dolphins. The artists used a distinctly Minoan style, with the paint initially being applied while the plaster was still wet. This might be evidence of something more than just a trade connection; perhaps the web of gift exchanges and diplomatic relationships that spread across Syria and Mesopotamia might by now have even extended to Crete. In this case, it’s possible that the services of Minoan artists were offered as a gift by the king on Crete to his counterparts at Alalakh, Qatna, and Kabri. This wouldn’t be unusual for the time. The tablets from Mari record all kinds of professionals and artists being sent from one city to another: musicians, physicians, gymnasts, diviners, barbers, translators, and on and on. They weren’t slaves being presented as gifts by one king to another, but well-regarded specialists whose expertise was needed wherever they went.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 108](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=133&annotation=UP3MZ574))