---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-stele-of-the-vultures-as-an-example-of-mesopotamian-diplomacy/"}
---

#USE in [[Maritime History Podcast/01 Episode Transcripts/Series 1 - The Bronze Age/(OLD) 002 - Surplus Food, Big Buildings, and Power Hungry Lugals\|(OLD) 002 - Surplus Food, Big Buildings, and Power Hungry Lugals]] OR [[Maritime History Podcast/01 Episode Transcripts/Series 1 - The Bronze Age/(OLD) 003 - Sargon to Hammurabi - Trade and Turmoil in Ancient Mesopotamia\|(OLD) 003 - Sargon to Hammurabi - Trade and Turmoil in Ancient Mesopotamia]]

“This was not a treaty between equals, though it had some of the same characteristics, such as the clear provisions and the oath to abide by them. Some sort of negotiation must have preceded it. The agreement was written out on a stone monument known as “Stela of the Vultures.” The text is illustrated with relief sculptures showing Eanatum proudly leading his massed infantrymen into war in one scene and riding in his chariot in another. The other side of the monument depicts a giant god holding a net, in which are seen the dead and dying men of Umma.

The Mesopotamian cities of the south recognized their shared culture, and treaties like the one between Enmetena and Lugalkiginedudu might have been common, even though the royal inscriptions of the Early Dynastic kings tended to dwell more on warfare. Enmetena did not renounce war. Like his predecessor Eanatum, he was a fighter, still warring against, and defeating, the city of Umma. He commissioned an inscription that described his victory: “Enmetena . . . defeated him. (The king of Umma) escaped, but was killed in Umma itself.” The battle scene must have been terrible to see, with “the bones of their personnel (the Ummaites) strewn over the plain.”67 Enmetena claimed that the bodies of the enemy dead required five separate burial mounds.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 33](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=58&annotation=XCCCEEAY))