---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-previous-growth-of-the-tyrrhenian-trade-network-established-a-center-that-then-could-link-the-eastwest-extremities-of-the-mediterranean/"}
---

“The final connecting up of the basin’s seas instead requires a complementary, and more specifically Mediterranean, analytical framework. The regular appearance of Levantine shipping in the far west, as eastern markets began to expand again, was in fact primarily a capillary result of something missing during the 2nd-millennium BCE climax, namely an established indigenous network of interaction and knowledge across the western as well as central Mediterranean seas. As we saw earlier, an uptake of sailing ships in the central Mediterranean during the terminal centuries of the 2nd millennium BCE triggered there a surge in mobility and sea trade. It took some time for the isolation of the west to be broken down, but by the onset of the 1st millennium BCE avidly metal-consuming Tyrrhenian communities were effecting the intake of southwest Iberia, where sailing skills they had learned from encounters with eastern sailors were in turn swiftly taken up. West and central Mediterranean metal goods and styles started to appear in each others’ home areas in some quantity, hinting at both trade and travelling metalworkers. At first Iberia was simply a stupendously metal-rich terminus for Tyrrhenian sailors, but as the submerged metal finds off Huelva so richly attest, it soon began to serve as a meeting point, too, with Atlantic traders drawn south by demand for their distinctive lead-rich bronzes, as well as Breton and Cornish tin. Links between the Tyrrhenian and Atlantic can be traced through the spread of the latter’s slashing swords well past Huelva and other Iberian find-spots to Sardinia, Sicily and Etruria, while roasting spits of a kind familiar in southeast England, western France and Atlantic Iberia ended up not just in Sardinia but also (in a further sign of eastward connections) at Amathus in Cyprus. To complement this, a Sicilian axe arrived at Hengistbury Head on the English Channel. The west and parts of the centre had been here once before, in a more attenuated manner, during the 3rd millennium BCE, when the Atlantic, Iberian and French beaker interactions reached Sardinia and western Sicily, but at that stage sailing ships, the Mediterranean’s real distance-shrinkers, were still confined to the Levant. This time the two meshed, and the result was electric. The ‘fantastic cauldron of expanding cultures and commerces’ that one astute ancient historian has described in the later Iron Age central and western Mediterranean was, we now realize, already simmering by the opening centuries of the 1st millennium BCE. (Broodbank, 2013, 491-93)