---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-advent-of-true-seafaring-in-the-mediterranean-was-a-hunter-gatherer-invention/"}
---

#### Broodbank

“No boat remains or depictions are known this early, or for several more millennia, so it is impossible to ascertain whether seacraft improved at this juncture, but on balance it is more likely that the same kind of craft that must have existed by the Last Glacial Maximum, if not before, remained in use. After all, a boat afloat after 10 km (6 miles) should, all things being equal, still be so after 100 km (60 miles). Simple vessels still, or until very recently, in use provide a good idea of the general options and performance.15 Reed-built, skin-and-frame and fire-hollowed dugout craft were all feasible with the toolkits of the time. Each might carry a few people and a light load in moderate seas over some 20 km (12 miles) a day as the crow flies. An experimental journey from Attica to Melos in a 6-m (20-ft) reed boat with six paddlers managed this in good conditions, but once days lost to bad weather are taken into account it took two weeks to complete a one-way journey, implying trips of a month if time for quarrying and return against prevailing winds is added in 5.3. Certain people (probably men) must have been away at sea for a long time. Even the shortest crossing to Cyprus from coastal Turkey, from where the island presents the easiest, lengthways target, would have required a couple of days and the intervening night, and the journey from the Levant is longer, with all sight of land lost in mid-crossing. These are skillful exploits in comparison to anything that can be clearly demonstrated to have taken place substantially earlier. As such, they mark the inception of true seafaring in the Mediterranean, and the point at which the basin begins to rival the earlier foci of activity along the west Pacific rim–though the Pacific retained its lead, with a daring crossing to the island of Manus in Melanesia, shortly before 12,000 BCE, that traversed 200-20 km (125-35 miles) of open ocean, 60-90 km (35-55 miles) of which lay out of sight of land. In both these theatres, it should be underscored, ==seafaring was an emphatically hunter-gatherer invention.”== ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 154](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=141&annotation=SAC55QIH))

“the advent of seafaring raised the prospect of a Mediterranean turned inside out, an arena more fittingly understood from its centre than its edges.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 143](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=143&annotation=BAGF2FJL))

#### McGrail

“The earliest evidence for overseas voyages in the Mediterranean comes from the Peloponnes/Melos region in the western Aegean: Melos was undoubtedly an island even at times of lower sea levels (van Andel, 1989). Tools of the volcanic glass obsidian, quarried in Melos, have been excavated from the Franchthi cave in southern Greece, in contexts dated to the tenth millennium BC (Perles, 1979; Bass, 1980: 137; Renfrew, 1998: 255). This shipment of obsidian would have involved a sea crossing of some 50 nautical miles (93 km) if the direct route were taken, but an indirect route through the western Cycladic islands seems more likely Such a voyage would have been undertaken over a period of days, with distances between islands being 15 nautical miles (28 k m ) or less (van Andel, 1989)—see the route taken by Tzalas (1995) on his experimental voyage (4.5.3).” ([McGrail, 2002, p. 99](zotero://select/library/items/LVPZGRY3)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85TAQ5UC?page=99&annotation=ZFLH3YHM))