---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-nile-was-egypt-s-calendar-and-made-possible-their-political-unity/"}
---

As early as 3200 B.C., the whole Nile Valley was united with the Nile Delta into a single kingdom which lasted for three thousand years, until the Age of Cleopatra. Political unity was reinforced by nature. Like the heavenly bodies themselves, the Nile displayed a regular but more melodramatic natural rhythm. The longest river in Africa, the Nile stretches four thousand miles from its remote headstream, gathering the rainfall and snowmelt of the Ethiopian highlands and all the northeastern continent into a single grand channel to the Mediterranean. The pharaoh’s realm was aptly called the Empire of the Nile. The ancients, taking Herodotus’ cue, called Egypt “the gift of the Nile.” The search for the sources of the Nile, like the search for the Holy Grail, had mystic overtones, which stirred death-defying explorers into the nineteenth century. 

The Nile made possible the crops, the commerce, and the architecture of Egypt. Highway of commerce, the Nile was also a freightway for the materials of colossal temples and pyramids. A granite obelisk of three thousand tons could be quarried at Aswan and then floated two hundred miles down the river to Thebes. The Nile fed the cities that clustered along its banks. No wonder that the Egyptians called the Nile “the sea” and in the Bible it is “the river.” 

The rhythm of the Nile was the rhythm of Egyptian life. The annual rising of its waters set the calendar of sowing and reaping with its three seasons: inundation, growth, and harvest. The flooding of the Nile from the end of June till late October brought down rich silt, in which crops were planted and grew from late October to late February, to be harvested from late February till the end of June. The rising of the Nile, as regular and as essential to life as the rising of the sun, marked the Nile year. The primitive Egyptian calendar, naturally enough, was a “nilometer”—a simple vertical scale on which the flood level was yearly marked. Even a few years’ reckoning of the Nile year showed that it did not keep in step with the phases of the moon. But very early the Egyptians found that twelve months of thirty days each could provide a useful calendar of the seasons if another five days were added at the end, to make a year of 365 days. This was the “civil” year, or the “Nile year,” that the Egyptians began to use as early as 4241 B.C.

(Boorstin, 1993, pp. 6-7)