---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-evolution-of-the-bireme-invented-by-the-phoenicians-and-evolved-into-the-pentecontor/"}
---

The Aegean longship, with its oarsmen and keel, now fully developed, appears for the first time on a bas-relief in Karatepe, a zone of Phoenician influence in the former Hittite region, in about the eighth century B.C. Were the Phoenicians or perhaps the Mycenaeans responsible for its perfected design? Thanks to this design it became the classic longship of the Mediterranean, the kind depicted on a Spartan ivory as well as on so many geometric vases with black figures; the design, too, which Sidon chose to put on its coins in the fifth century B.C., as did the Greek island of Samos. This kind of ship would be further improved by the Greeks, who made a lighter version by taking out the decks. They were therefore able to extend its length to 30 or 35 metres and put up the number of oarsmen to fifty: this was the famous pentecontor on which the Athenian fleet relied, according to Thucydides, down to the battle of Salamis (480 B.C.). After that came the reign of the trireme with its three tiered banks of oarsmen. 

It is a mistake, however (derived from a few Greek vases with faulty perspective), to credit the Greeks with the invention of the bireme. A perfectly unambiguous document proves otherwise. On the walls of the palace of Nineveh, the Phoenician fleet is shown fleeing the port of Tyre before the city was attacked by Sennacherib (700 B.C.): roundships with symmetrically raised ends are shown alongside longships with pointed bows. The lessons of the Aegean had evidently been fully assimilated by the Phoenicians, but with one innovation: all these ships had two banks of tiered oarsmen. This was the bireme, the importance of which may in any case have been exaggerated. According to Kirk, the Greeks borrowed the design from the Phoenicians later on, in the sixth century, but only for a short while, preferring the pentecontor which was safer at sea. The Phoenicians themselves used the bireme only in calm weather and close to shore. ([Location 1846](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=1846)) (Braudel 2001, p. 83-84)