---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/the-lands-of-magan-and-meluhha-and-dilmun-supplied-sumer-with-many-of-its-economic-necessities/"}
---

“Magan, modern Oman, was less urbanized than Dilmun, but it was home to extensive copper mines—it was apparently one of Mesopotamia’s chief sources for copper in the Early Dynastic period. The people of Magan also quarried a hard black stone called diorite that the Mesopotamian kings valued for statues.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 47](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=72&annotation=B2IC3LC5))

“We do know, though, that they produced long, thin, carnelian beads of astonishing quality. It may be a little hard for us to appreciate these beads. Factories could mass-produce them now, but imagine the skill involved in making a hole several centimeters in length but of minuscule diameter in a hard stone, without a diamond drill bit and with only one’s own muscles to power the drill.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 48](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=73&annotation=CMU5H8WJ))

“Influence in the other direction is harder to spot. No Mesopotamian objects have materialized in Indus Valley excavations, so it seems that fewer Mesopotamians made the long journey to Meluhha than vice versa. But some images from Mesopotamian art did begin to be used on Indus Valley stamp seals. A few of them featured a favorite Mesopotamian image, a nude hero standing in a contest with one, or more often two, ferocious animals.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 50](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=75&annotation=ZMUKISZL))

“Lapis lazuli was one of the types of stone that was sometimes used to make cylinder seals, though probably only for the richest people in society, given its value. Its deep blue surface can sparkle with golden flecks (so-called fool’s gold), giving the appearance of a miniature starry sky. Most scholars agree that lapis lazuli was mined in just one place during ancient times: a forbidding mountain location now called Sar-i Sang in an almost inaccessible gorge in the far northeastern ranges of the Hindu Kush mountains.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 50](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=75&annotation=RLKNWA5A))

“What did the Mesopotamians and Syrians produce that could possibly have paid for the wealth that they acquired? Chances are, they used fine textiles as at least part of their payment. This would account for the archival texts at Ebla that record, with so much attention to detail, a vast output of manufactured cloth. It would also account for why archaeologists find no evidence of Mesopotamian or Syrian goods in Afghanistan or in the Indus region, beyond adopted artistic motifs. The textiles would have disintegrated long ago.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 51](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=76&annotation=DX2L7E64))

“To the west of Meluhha was Magan in Oman. Here, the copper mines were still active and the towns still occupied in the eighteenth century BCE. Vast amounts of copper were being mined to meet the growing demand across the Near East. Surprisingly, direct contact with Mesopotamia was minimal; nothing like Manishtusu’s earlier invasion of Magan disturbed the peace there. Few, if any, Mesopotamians were in Magan at all, and ships from Magan don’t seem to have traveled to Mesopotamia. By the Old Babylonian period, the people of Magan sent their copper to Dilmun, and it was from Dilmun that the Mesopotamians acquired it.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 97](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=122&annotation=LYUF3W7I))

“A passage from the myth "Enki and the World Order" reads: The lands Magan and [[Encyclopedia/02 Places/Dilmun\|Dilmun]] Looked up at me, Enki, Moored (?) the Dilmun-boat to the ground (?), Loaded the Magan-boat sky high; The Magilum-boat of Meluhha, Transports silver and gold, Brings them to Nippur for Enlil, the king of all the lands. Although the meaning of several of the words and phrases is uncertain, the sense of the passage as a whole is quite clear: the people of [[Encyclopedia/02 Places/Magan and Meluhha\|Magan and Meluhha]] are depicted as bringing their products by boat—note that the Magilum-boat is here clearly identified with Meluhha—to Enlil's temple in Nippur, that is, of course, to Sumer. It is hardly likely that this description of third millennium B.C. "international relations" was nothing more than an invention on the part of our poets; it must have been common knowledge that these three countries supplied Sumer with many of its economic necessities either through forced tribute or commercial exchange or both.” ([Kramer, 1963, p. 280](zotero://select/library/items/TI24BNVH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EY8R4485?page=280&annotation=XFNHPMAT))