---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/there-are-numerous-parallels-between-sumerian-mythsliterature-and-motifscharacters-in-the-christian-bible/"}
---

“Be that as it may, here are a number of Biblical parallels from Sumerian literature which unquestionably point to traces of Sumerian influence: 

(1) Creation of the Universe
	The Sumerians, like the ancient Hebrews, thought that a primeval sea had existed prior to creation. The universe, according to the Sumerians, consisted of a united heaven and earth engendered in some way in this primeval sea, and it was the air-god, Enlil—perhaps not unlike the ruach-elohim of Genesis—who separated heaven from earth. 

(2) Creation of Man 
	Man, according to both the Hebrews and the Sumerians, was conceived as having been fashioned of clay and imbued with the "breath of life." The purpose for which he was created was to serve the gods—or Jahweh alone, in the case of the Hebrews—with prayer, supplication, and sacrifices.” ([Kramer, 1963, p. 293](zotero://select/library/items/TI24BNVH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EY8R4485?page=293&annotation=DE32Y8TI))

(3) Creation Techniques 
	Creation, according to both Biblical and Sumerian writers, was accomplished primarily in two ways: by divine command and by actual "making" or "fashioning.“ In either case, the actual creation was preceded by divine planning, though this need not have been explicitly stated. 	
	
(4) Paradise 
	No Sumerian parallels to the story of the Garden of Eden and the Fall of Man have yet been found. There are, however, several paradise motifs that are significant for comparative purposes, including one that may help to clarify the rib episode in Genesis 2:21-23. Moreover, there is some reason to believe that the very idea of a divine paradise, a garden of the gods, is of Sumerian origin (see pages 147-49). 
	
(5) The Flood 
	As has long been recognized, the Biblical and Sumerian versions of the Flood story show numerous obvious and close parallels. Noteworthy, too, is the fact that according to at least one Mesopotamian tradition there were ten antediluvian rulers, each with a life span of extraordinary length, which is reminiscent of some of the Biblical antediluvian patriarchs. 
	
(6) The Cain-Abel Motif 
	The rivalry motif depicted in the undoubtedly much abbreviated Cain-Abel episode of the Bible was a high favorite with the Sumerian writers and poets (see pages 217-23 for fuller details). 
	
(7) The Tower of Babel and the Dispersion of Mankind 
	The story of the building of the Tower of Babel originated, no doubt, in an effort to explain the existence of the Mesopotamian ziggurats. To the Hebrews, these towering structures, which could often be seen in a state of ruin and decay, became symbols of man's feeling of insecurity and the not unrelated lust for power which brings upon him humiliation and suffering. It is most unlikely, therefore, that a parallel to this story will be found among the Sumerians, to whom the ziggurat represented a bond between heaven and earth, between god and man. On the other hand, the idea that there was a time when all peoples of the earth "had one language and the same words" and that this happy state was brought to an end by an irate deity may have a parallel in a golden-age passage which is part of the Sumerian epic tale "Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta" (see pages 262 and 285). 
	
(8) The Earth and Its Organization 
	The Sumerian myth "Enki and the World Order: The Organization of the Earth and Its Cultural Processes" (see pages 174-83) provides a detailed account of the activities of Enki, the Sumerian god of wisdom, in organizing the earth and in establishing what might be termed law and order on it; this poem has its Biblical echoes in, for example, Deuteronomy 32:7-14 (note especially verse 8) and Psalm 107. 
	
(9) Personal God 
	To judge from the covenant between God and Abraham—note, too, the reference to a "god of Nahor" in Genesis 31:53—the ancient Hebrews were familiar with the idea of a personal god. The belief in the existence of a personal god was evolved by the Sumerians at least as early as the middle of the third millennium B.C. According to Sumerian teachers and sages, every adult male and family head had his "personal god," or a kind of good angel whom he looked upon as his divine father. This personal god was in all probability adopted by the Sumerian paterfamilias as the result of an oracle or a dream or a vision involving a mutual understanding or agreement not unlike the covenant between the Hebrew patriarchs and Jahweh. To be sure, there could have been nothing mutually exclusive about the covenant between the Sumerian and his tutelary deity, and in this respect, therefore, it differed very significantly from that between Abraham and his god. All that the Sumerian expected of his personal god was that he speak in his behalf and intercede for him in the assembly of the gods whenever the occasion demanded and thus insure for him a long life and good health. In return, he glorified his god with special prayers, supplications, and sacrifices, although at the same time he continued to worship the other deities of the Sumerian pantheon. Nevertheless, as the Sumerian literary document "Man and His God" indicates, there existed a close, intimate, trusting and even tender relationship between the Sumerian and his personal god, one which bears no little resemblance to that between Jahweh and the Hebrew patriarchs and, in later days, between Jahweh and the Hebrew people as a whole.” ([Kramer, 1963, p. 294](zotero://select/library/items/TI24BNVH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EY8R4485?page=294&annotation=5GC8PSR4))

(10) Law 
	That the Biblical laws and the long-known Hammurabi law code show numerous similarities in content, terminology, and even arrangement is recognized by practically all students of the Bible. But the Hammurabi code itself, as has been shown in recent years, is an Akkadian compilation of laws based largely on Sumerian prototypes (see pages 79-88). In fact, there is good reason to infer that the extraordinary growth and development of legal concepts, practices, precedents, and compilations in the ancient Near East goes back largely to the Sumerians and their rather one-sided emphasis on rivalry and superiority (see pages 26G-67). 
	
(11) Ethics and Morals 
	The ethical concepts and moral ideals developed by the Sumerians (see pages 123-25) were essentially identical with those of the Hebrews, although they lacked their almost palpable ethical sensitivity and moral fervor, especially as these qualities are exemplified in the Biblical prophetic literature. Psychologically, the Sumerian was more distant and aloof than the Hebrew—more emotionally restrained, more formal and methodical. He tended to eye his fellow men with some suspicion, misgiving, and even apprehension, which inhibited to no small extent the human warmth, sympathy, and affection so vital to spiritual growth and well-being. And in spite of his high ethical attainments, the Sumerian never reached the lofty conviction that a "pure heart" and "clean hands" were more worthy in the eyes of his god than lengthy prayers, profuse sacrifices, and elaborate ritual. 
	
(12) Divine Retribution and National Catastrophe 
	Jahweh's wrath and the humiliation and destruction of the people that incurs it constitute an often repeated theme in the Biblical books. Usually the national catastrophe comes about through a violent attack by some neighboring people, especially selected as Jahweh's scourge and whip. To this theme the historiographic document "The Curse of Agade" offers a rather interesting parallel: Enlil, the leading deity of the Sumerian pantheon, having been deeply angered by the blasphemous act of a ruler of Agade, lifted his eyes to the mountains and brought down the barbarous and cruel Gutians, who proceeded to destroy not only Agade but almost all of Sumer as well.” ([Kramer, 1963, p. 295](zotero://select/library/items/TI24BNVH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EY8R4485?page=295&annotation=H5YN5ATH))

(13) The Plague Motif 
	The Sumerian myth "Inanna and Shukalletuda: The Gardener's Mortal Sin" (see pages 162-63) contains a plague motif which parallels to some extent the Biblical plague motif in the Exodus story: in both cases, a deity angered by the misdeeds and obduracy of an individual sends a series of plagues against an entire land and its people. 
	
(14) Suffering and Submission: The "Job" Motif 
	Quite recently, a Sumerian poetic essay which is of rather unusual significance for Biblical comparative studies has become available. Its central theme, human suffering and submission, is identical with that treated so sensitively and poignantly in the Biblical Book of Job. Even the introductory plot is the same: A man—unnamed in the Sumerian poem—who had been wealthy, wise, righteous, and blessed with friends and kin is overwhelmed one day, for no apparent reason, by sickness, suffering, poverty, betrayal, and hatred. Admittedly, however, the Sumerian essay, which consists of less than one hundred and fifty lines, compares in no way with the Biblical book in breadth, depth, and beauty; it is much closer in mood, temper, and content to the more tearful and plaintive psalms of the Book of Psalms. 
	
(15) Death and the Nether World 
	The Biblical Sheol, and, for that matter, the Hades of the Greeks, has its counterpart in the Sumerian Kur. Like the Hebrew Sheol, the Kur was the dark, dread abode of the dead. It was a land of no return, from which only exceptionally the shade of a once prominent figure might be called up for questioning. In the Sumerian literary documents, there are several other interesting parallels with Hebrew ideas relating to the nether world: its depiction as the pitiful home of former kings and princes; the raising of the shades of the dead from it; and the imprisonment in it of the god Dumuzi, the Biblied Tammuz, for whom the women of Jerusalem were lamenting as late as the days of the prophet Ezekiel.” ([Kramer, 1963, p. 296](zotero://select/library/items/TI24BNVH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EY8R4485?page=296&annotation=B336KUNV))