---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/trade-merely-requires-the-abscence-of-war-and-willing-trade-partners/"}
---

As opposed to these sought-after regions were those where there was strong population pressure and a constant overflow of people. It was not that demographic density was greater there than elsewhere; on the contrary, it was inferior to what could be found on the banks of the Nile or the Euphrates. But these regions were over-populated in relation to their resources—hence the disequilibrium which gave them an unsettled history. They were situated in the mountains, deserts and steppes and on many sea-coasts. Seagoing people of the Mediterranean might be farmers and cultivators as well, but the narrow coastal zones, usually hemmed in by the nearby mountains, were not as a rule self-sufficient. They were also dependent on the sea. ([Location 2825](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2825))(Braudel 2001, 135)

Seagoing peoples do not provide such striking examples of aggressive migration. Did they shrink from taking on a political role? Trade merely requires the absence of war and the co-operation of others. Cretans and Mycenaeans had settled in the Cyclades, at several points in Asia Minor, and in Rhodes and Cyprus. The Syrians had several small trading colonies in Egypt, which were certainly prosperous, and may even have begun to prospect in the western sea. These settlements are not negligible when viewed in detail, but cannot compare with the great waves of colonization of the western Mediterranean which were to follow during the first millennium B.C. ([Location 2866](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B004FEFSCC&location=2866))(Braudel 2001, 137)