---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/triremes-quickly-supplanted-pentaconters-as-the-main-and-most-effective-form-of-fighting-ship-despite-the-huge-costs-involved/"}
---

“At sea the critical shift came over a century later. Apart from capacious sailed ‘tubs’ for large cargos and open-sea traffic, pentekonters remained the workhorses of maritime mobility and naval fighting all over the basin for much of the 6th century, and effective ones too, if we consider their parts in tales of trade, population transfer, naval fighting and raiding recorded by Herodotus. Reputedly just two pentekonters brought one initial nucleus of people from the Aegean to Africa, in a venture to which we shall return. The pentekonters’ eclipse came in the form of a much larger sailed galley, the trireme, half as long again and typically with three times as many oarsmen in its triple banks. Triremes were not decisively faster, but their ram packed a terrible punch and at the beachhead they could disgorge large numbers of soldiers, triggering a sudden leap in the scale of violence that could be unleashed from the sea with little warning on distant shores – a reminder, if one is needed, of the darker side of connectivity and the coercive impacts of marine technology. Their time and place of invention is disputed, although against the traditional consensus of a gradual spread from the 8th or 7th century BCE Levant into the Aegean, a persuasive case can be made for a more rapid inception close to 540 BCE, perhaps at Sidon under its latest imperial master, or maybe Carthage, both places where we shall see that transporting armies across to islands was becoming a military priority. On highly connected seas the trireme, like the early 20th-century AD dreadnought, rendered previous fighting ships swiftly obsolete, and within a decade of 540 BCE the leading east Aegean maritime city-states had adopted the new super-ships. Polycrates of Samos, for example, soon mustered forty to support his overseas ambitions. By the start of the following century, Aegina, Corinth and younger maritime polities such as Athens and Syracuse were building them on an equivalent scale, initially to fight each other. Triremes resembled dreadnoughts in their crippling cost as well, which exceeded the means of all but the very wealthiest individuals and restricted the naval scope of many entire city-states, thus accelerating the appearance of state navies as opposed to flotillas of elite-owned fighting vessels, and concentrating such formations in a few exceptionally rich cities. The political consequences would become ruthlessly clear within half a century.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 559-61](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=527&annotation=W3YF63RE))