---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/ugarit-the-king-of-mari-and-ties-to-crete-and-the-egyptian-keftiu/"}
---

“The palace at Mari comprised 300 rooms spread over 2.5 ha (6 acres). It was the marvel of its age according to one ruler of Ugarit, who sought Yamhad’s blessing to travel from the coast to visit it. Reverse journeys are recorded too. In one, a king of Mari fought his way to the coast, where he triumphantly sacrificed, cleansed his troops in the ‘vast sea’ and loaded up with cedar, boxwood and other fragrant timbers. Later, his frequently peripatetic son, Zimri-Lim, by then himself king, journeyed to the Mediterranean, via a three-month circuitous route with long stopovers at his father-in-law’s palace at Yamhad, as well as at Ugarit, where he bought an entire village. With him went a retinue of thousands, consisting of soldiers, servants, bureaucrats, wives and concubines, as well as huge quantities of metal and other gifts dispensed and received along the way - altogether quite a pageant for Mediterranean eyes. We owe such details to Mari’s modern treasure, its archive of 20,000 tablets, including 6,000 letters, dating mainly to the reign of Zimri-Lim, its last king, that lay bare the scope and detail of this far-reaching palace economy just across the Mediterranean’s eastern border. The insights from this archive exceed any hope of summary here. Among those most relevant to us are the interstate alliances involving Yamhad and Qatna, the latter still directly reachable, even for large, if lightly burdened expeditions, across the desertifying and dangerously lawless steppe via Tadmor, later Palmyra, without the detour along the otherwise preferred northern route through Yamhad. Equally revelatory are the emissaries of Babylon reported as present as far south as Hazor, and last but not least Mari’s key role as a dispenser of central Asian tin, which it traded on into the Mediterranean. Tin consignments went from Mari to Hazor, Qatna, Yamhad and Ugarit, in the last case including small amounts destined for a man of ‘Kaptara’, and the interpreter working for this place’s chief trader at Ugarit. Kaptara further appears at Mari in the context of gold-embellished weapons, metal vessels, textiles and leather. Like its Egyptian cognate ‘Keftiu’ (first encountered in the early Middle Kingdom), this term denotes Crete, or the generic southern Aegean – the first external textual acknowledgment of the region’s existence.” ([Broodbank, 2013, p. 366](zotero://select/library/items/IR54JIQG)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85K7BT2G?page=342&annotation=UM254W9C))