---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/ur-and-akkadian-boat-models-and-seal-depictions/"}
---

#USE in [[Maritime History Podcast/01 Episode Transcripts/Series 1 - The Bronze Age/(OLD) 002 - Surplus Food, Big Buildings, and Power Hungry Lugals\|(OLD) 002 - Surplus Food, Big Buildings, and Power Hungry Lugals]] AND [[Maritime History Podcast/01 Episode Transcripts/Series 1 - The Bronze Age/(OLD) 003 - Sargon to Hammurabi - Trade and Turmoil in Ancient Mesopotamia\|(OLD) 003 - Sargon to Hammurabi - Trade and Turmoil in Ancient Mesopotamia]]

“All of them are similar in shape to the fourth-millennium BC depictions of boat-shaped reed rafts described above: that is, with a flattish bottom and high rising ends (Fig.3.2): none has any 'conventional' sign of bindings seen on depictions of bundle rafts, and therefore they may represent boats. Some of the clay models from Ur tombs dated to c.2250 BC appear to have a framework of withies, paddles and poles for propulsion, and a cargo of pots (Barnett, 1958: 221). These may represent reed bundle boats waterproofed with bitumen. The silver model from Ur (Fig. 3.6) ,of about the same date, has twelve paddles and a pole for propulsion (Barnett, 1958 : 221; Bass, 1972: 28): there appears to be no internal framework other than seven transverse members at sheer level, presumably benches for paddlers. There is some possibility that this model represents a planked boat (although as with the clay models, no planks are delineated) but it seems more likely to be a model of a bundle boat, somewhat similar to the twentieth century zaima (Fig. 3.4) but bigger and with rising ends, and with thwarts rather than transverse sticks.” ([McGrail, 2002, p. 61](zotero://select/library/items/LVPZGRY3)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85TAQ5UC?page=61&annotation=HM3SSS3Q))

“The rather fanciful boat on an Akkadian seal (2350-2000 BC) published by Bass (1972:28, fig. 9) has the flat bottom and rising (here, vertical) ends generally associated with early Mesopotamia. There is no sign of planking or bundle bindings and so this may be a representation of a bundle boat. On the other hand, the craft seen on a seal of c.2300 BC (Casson, 1971: fig. 21) although of a similar shape does have the vertical lines across the hull generally understood as reed-bundle bindings and therefore probably represents a bundle raft.” ([McGrail, 2002, p. 61](zotero://select/library/items/LVPZGRY3)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/85TAQ5UC?page=61&annotation=7F36E55N))