---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/research-vault/02-atomic-notes/ur-nanshe-sargon-of-akkad-and-other-sumerian-rulers-traded-with-dilmun/"}
---

### Ur-Nanshe, [[Encyclopedia/01 People/Sargon of Akkad\|Sargon of Akkad]], and other Sumerian rulers traded with [[Encyclopedia/02 Places/Dilmun\|Dilmun]]

“It has a long history, to judge from the votive and economic documents, beginning with Ur-Nanshe, who records that "the ships of Dilmun brought him wood as a tribute from foreign lands." The boats of Dilmun anchored at the Agade docks alongside those of [[Encyclopedia/02 Places/Magan and Meluhha\|Magan and Meluhha]] in the time of Sargon the Great. According to the economic documents from the time of the Third Dynasty of Ur and the Isin-Larsa period which followed, the imports from Dilmun consisted of gold, copper and copper utensils, lapis lazuli, tables inlaid with ivory, "fisheyes" (perhaps pearls), ivory and ivory objects (combs, breastplates, and boxes as well as human- and animal-shaped figurines and end pieces for furniture), beads of semiprecious stones, dates, and onions. "Dilmun onions' in fact, are mentioned in the economic texts dating from as early as the twenty-fourth century B.C.” ([Kramer, 1963, p. 283](zotero://select/library/items/TI24BNVH)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EY8R4485?page=283&annotation=JGLHCK5C))

### Sargon’s trade with foreign lands, and Dilmun in particular

“Sargon mentioned, in one of his inscriptions, the names of some of the distant lands with which he traded for precious goods, and he claimed that traders from those places came all the way to Akkad. He had his scribes write the following: “At the wharf of Akkad he made moor ships from Meluhha, ships from Magan, (and) ships from Dilmun.” At a later date, after the end of Sargon’s empire, another writer recalled a similar scene in Akkad: “The Meluhhaites, the people of the black land, brought up to her the (exotic) wares of foreign lands,” including elephants, monkeys, and water buffalo.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 45](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=70&annotation=TH7M2CPY))

“These ships that Sargon invited to come to Akkad were from very far away. Dilmun was southeast of Mesopotamia in the Persian Gulf: it comprised the island of what is now Bahrain and the mainland opposite. Farther southeast still, beyond the Strait of Hormuz, lay Magan, in the land that is now Oman. Meluhha lay across the Arabian Sea from Magan, in the region of the Indus Valley. These were, indeed, important and rich places in the late third millennium BCE. Archaeologists have worked for decades in all three regions and have found plenty of evidence that Sargon was right to brag about his ties to their lands.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 46](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=71&annotation=G5AG9RBL))

“These “ships of Dilmun” were perhaps the key to the land’s economic success, as Dilmun was almost as devoid of valuable resources as Mesopotamia. By building ships and conveying goods from place to place, the Dilmunites prospered, and their land became a central meeting place where people from south of the Gulf could sell copper, ivory, tin, and timber. Near Dilmun, the island of Tarut might have been the source of distinctive vessels made of chlorite, a greenish gray stone, which were fashionable in the Early Dynastic and Akkadian periods across a vast area. They have been found as far west as Mari and as far east as the Hindu Kush mountains. The people of Dilmun could have shipped all these goods north, no doubt making a healthy profit on the transactions” ([Podany, 2012, p. 46](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=71&annotation=Q4IICDCE))

“In the reign of Sargon, boats from Meluhha probably hugged the coast as they headed to Mesopotamia, sailing west along the southern shores of what are now Pakistan and Iran and perhaps stopping in Magan before entering the Strait of Hormuz and sailing north on to Dilmun. When they reached the mouth of the Euphrates River, the wind and the current would both have been against them. Perhaps they had to tow their boats up the river to Akkad. Their journey stretched for almost 2,000 miles each way, taking months. Finally they reached Sargon’s capital, and we have evidence of them there, proudly featured by the king in his inscription” ([Podany, 2012, p. 48](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=73&annotation=S7P2GHM3))

“It’s a tantalizing image—boats from such distant places all roped to the quay in Akkad, their crews trying to make themselves understood as they unloaded their cargoes, which were destined, presumably, for the palace. The boats would have been loaded with carnelian, shell, and pearls, along with ivory and precious black wood, and perhaps animals such as water buffalo, zebu, monkeys, and even Indian elephants (though it would have been a challenge to transport such large animals by boat). Perhaps the traders then milled among the Mesopotamians in the streets, sampling the local foods and staring up at the impressive city walls and temples, like visitors anywhere. The earlier carnelian and shell objects found at Mari and Ur had probably arrived in the same way. Admittedly, there is no reference to Meluhha before Sargon’s inscription, but carnelian beads from the region had been imported for some time before.” ([Podany, 2012, p. 48](zotero://select/library/items/GN73GMNP)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/LXNK9GFK?page=73&annotation=SERWTRBQ))